The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Justin Martyr, and Other Poems, by 
Richard Chenevix Trench

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Story of Justin Martyr, and Other Poems

Author: Richard Chenevix Trench

Release Date: September 8, 2017 [EBook #55507]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF JUSTIN MARTYR ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










                                POEMS.




                                  THE
                        STORY OF JUSTIN MARTYR,
                                  AND
                             OTHER POEMS.

                                  BY
                       RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH,
             PERPETUAL CURATE OF CURDRIDGE CHAPEL, HANTS.

                                LONDON:
                      EDWARD MOXON, DOVER STREET.

                              MDCCCXXXV.




                                LONDON:
                     BRADBURY AND EVANS, PRINTERS,
                             WHITEFRIARS.




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE

Dedicatory Lines                                                       1

The Story of Justin Martyr                                             9

Sonnet                                                                27

To ----                                                               28

To the same                                                           29

To the same                                                           30

To the same                                                           31

To the same                                                           32

A Legend of Alhambra                                                  33

England                                                               38

The Island of Madeira                                                 39

Gibraltar                                                             40

England                                                               41

Poland                                                                42

To Nicholas, Emperor of Russia, on his reported Conduct
towards the Poles                                                     43

On the Results of the last French Revolution                          44

To England                                                            45

Sonnet                                                                46

Sonnet to Silvio Pellico                                              47

To the Same                                                           48

From the Spanish                                                      49

Lines                                                                 52

To a Friend entering the Ministry                                     53

To a Child Playing                                                    57

The Herring-Fishers of Lochfyne                                       59

In the Isle of Mull                                                   60

The same                                                              61

At Sea                                                                62

An Evening in France                                                  63

Sonnet. To my Child, a Fellow-traveller                               68

The Descent of the Rhone                                              69

On the Perseus and Medusa of Benvenuto Cellini                        80

Lines written at the Village of Passignano, on the Lake of Thrasymene 81

Vesuvius, as seen from Capri                                          84

Vesuvius                                                              85

The same continued                                                    86

To England. Written after a visit to Sorrento                         87

Lines written after hearing some beautiful singing in a
Convent Church at Rome.                                               88

On a Picture of the Assumption by Murillo                             92

An Incident versified                                                 95

Address on leaving Rome to a Friend residing in that City             98

Tasso’s Dungeon, Ferrara                                             105

Sonnet                                                               106

At Brunecken, in the Tyrol                                           107

Sonnet                                                               108

Lines written in an Inn                                              109

To E ----                                                            114

To ----, on the Morning of her Baptism                               119

To a Lady singing                                                    122

The same continued                                                   123

The same continued                                                   124

The same continued                                                   125

The same continued                                                   126

Sonnet                                                               127

Sonnet                                                               128

Sonnet                                                               129

Despondency                                                          130

Ode to Sleep                                                         133

Atlantis                                                             139

Sais                                                                 143

Sonnet                                                               144

Recollections of Burgos                                              145

To a Friend                                                          148

To the Constitutional Exiles of 1823                                 151

To the same                                                          152

Sonnet                                                               153

On an early Death                                                    154

Sonnet                                                               160

Sonnet                                                               161

New Year’s Eve                                                       162

To my Child                                                          163

Sonnet                                                               164

Sonnet. In a Pass between the Walchen and the Waldensee              165

Sonnet                                                               166

Sonnet                                                               167

To my God-Child, on the Day of his Baptism                           168

The Monk and Bird                                                    172




ERRATA.

[Corrected in this etext]


Page   9, line 6, _for_ look _read_ looks.

...   26,  ... 3, _for_ flonrish _read_ flourish.

...  137,  ... 6, _for_ starerd _read_ starred.




DEDICATORY LINES.




         TO ----


    If, Lady, at thy bidding, I have strung
    As on one thread these few unvalued beads,
    I cannot ask the world to count them pearls,
    Or to esteem them better than they are:
    But thou, I know, wilt prize them, for by thee
    Solicited, I have beguiled with these
    The enforcèd leisure of the present time,
    And dedicate of right my little book
    To thee, beloved--sure at least of this
    That if my verse has aught of good or true,
    It will not lack the answer of one heart--
    And if herein it may be thou shalt find
    Some notes of jarring discord, some that speak
    A spirit ill at ease, unharmonised,
    Yet ’twere a wrong unto thyself to deem
    These are the utterance of my present heart,
    My present mood--but of long years ago,
    When neither in the light of thy calm eyes,
    Nor in the pure joys of an innocent home,
    Nor in the happy laughter of these babes,
    Had I as yet found comfort, peace, or joy.
    But all is changèd now, and could I weave
    A lay of power, it should not now be wrung
    From miserable moods of sullen sin,
    Chewing the bitter ashes of the fruit
    Itself had gathered; rather would I speak
    Of light from darkness, good from evil brought
    By an almighty power, and how all things,
    If we will not refuse the good they bring,
    Are messages of an almighty love,
    And full of blessings. Oh! be sure of this--
    All things are mercies while we count them so;
    And this believing, not keen poverty
    Nor wasting years of pain or slow disease,
    Nor death, which in a moment might lay low
    Our pleasant plants,--not these, if they should come,
    Shall ever drift our bark of faith ashore,
    Whose stedfast anchor is securely cast
    Within the veil, the veil of things unseen,
    Which now we know not, but shall know hereafter.

      Yet wherefore this? for we have not been called
    To interpret the dark ways of Providence,
    But that unsleeping eye that wakes for us,
    Has kept from hurt, and harm, and blind mischance,
    Our happy home till now. Yet not for this
    Can we escape our share of human fears
    And dim forebodings, chiefly when we think
    Under what hostile influence malign
    They may grow up, for whom their life is cast
    Now to begin in this unhappy age,
    When all, that by a solemn majesty
    And an enduring being once rebuked
    And put to shame the sordid thoughts of man,
    Must be no more permitted to affront
    Him and his littleness, or bid him back
    Unto the higher tasks and nobler cares
    For which he lives, for which his life is lent.

      Yet what though all things must be common now,
    And nothing sacred, nothing set apart,
    But each enclosure by rude hands laid waste,
    That did fence in from the world’s wilderness
    Some spot of holy ground, wherein might grow
    The tender slips, the planting of the Lord;
    Within the precincts of which holy spots,
    With awful ordinances fencèd round,
    They might grow up in beauty and in peace,
    In season due to be transplanted thence
    Into the garden of God,--what though all these
    May perish, there will yet remain to us
    One citadel, one ark, which hands profane
    Will scarce invade, or lay unholy touch
    Upon the sanctities inviolate,
    And pure religion of our sacred homes.
    And here the culture may proceed, and here
    Heaven may distil its rich and silent dews,
    When all around is parched as desert heath.
    For this may come, the withering and the drought,
    The laying waste of every holy hedge
    May come, how soon we know not, but may fear;
    Since nations walk, no less than men, by faith,
    As seeing that which is invisible
    Unto the sealèd eye of sensual men:
    And where this vision is not, or the seers
    Are lightly counted of, the people perish.
    And woe unto our country, if indeed
    She has left off this wisdom, or esteems
    This for her higher wisdom--to despise
    All spiritual purpose, all far-looking aim,
    And all that cannot be exchanged for gold--
    Woe unto her, and turbulent unrest
    Unto ourselves, who cannot hope or wish
    In her disquiet to lead quiet lives,
    Or to withdraw out of the stormy press
    And tumult--to withdraw and keep the latch
    Close fastened of our little world apart,
    A peaceful island in a stormy sea,
    A patch of sunshine amid shadows lying;
    This must not be, we were not called to this.
    And all the peace we know must be within,
    And from within--from that glad river fed,
    Whose springs lie deeper than that heat or cold,
    Or the vicissitudes earth’s surface knows
    Can reach to harm them.

                            Mayest thou know well
    What are these springing waters, wells of life,
    By the great Father dug for us at first,
    And which, when sin had stopped them, love anew
    Has opened, and has given them their old names
    And former virtue[1]; and from these refreshed,
    Mayest thou pass onward through the wilderness,
    And knowing what of ill is imminent,
    And may descend upon us, evermore
    Strengthen with faith and prayer, with lofty thought
    And effort, and it may be in some part
    With soul-sustaining verse, the citadel
    Of courage and heroic fortitude,
    Which in the centre of a woman’s heart
    Is stablished, whatsoever outwardly
    Of doubt or womanly weak fear prevail.




              POEMS, &c.




         THE STORY OF JUSTIN MARTYR.

(SEE JUSTIN MARTYR’S FIRST DIALOGUE WITH TRYPHO.)


    It seems to me like yesterday,
    The morning when I took my way
    Upon the shore--in solitude;
    For in that miserable mood
    It was relief to quit the ken
    And the inquiring looks of men--
    The looks of love and gentleness,
    And pity, that would fain express
    Its only purpose was to know,
    That, knowing, it might soothe my woe:
    But when I felt that I was free
    From searching gaze, it was to me
    Like ending of a dreary task,
    Or putting off a cumbrous mask.

      I wandered forth upon the shore,
    Wishing this lie of life was o’er;
    What was beyond I could not guess,
    I thought it might be quietness,
    And now I had no dream of bliss,
    No thought, no other hope but this--
    To be at rest--for all that fed
    The dream of my proud youth had fled,
    My dream of youth, that I would be
    Happy and glorious, wise and free,
    In mine own right, and keep my state,
    And would repel the heavy weight,
    The load that crushed unto the ground
    The servile multitude around;
    The purpose of my life had failed,
    The heavenly heights I would have scaled,
    Seemed more than ever out of sight,
    Further beyond my feeble flight.
    The beauty of the universe
    Was lying on me like a curse;
    Only the lone surge at my feet
    Uttered a soothing murmur sweet,
    As every broken weary wave
    Sunk gently to a quiet grave,
    Dying on the bosom of the sea--
    And death grew beautiful to me,
    Until it seemed a mother mild,
    And I like some too happy child;
    A happy child, that tired with play,
    Through a long summer holiday,
    Runs to his mother’s arms to weep
    His little weariness asleep.
    Rest--rest--all passion that once stirred
    My heart, had ended in one word--
    My one desire to be at rest,
    To lay my head on any breast,
    Where there was hope that I might keep
    A dreamless and unbroken sleep;
    And the lulled ocean seemed to say,
    “With me is quiet,--come away.”
    There is a tale that oft has stirred
    My bosom deeply: you have heard
    How that the treacherous sea-maid’s art
    With song inveigles the lost heart
    Of some lone fisher, that has stood
    For days beside the glimmering flood;
    And when has grown upon him there
    The mystery of earth and air,
    He cannot find with whom to part
    The burden lying at his heart;
    So when the mermaid bids him come,
    And summons to her peaceful home,
    He hears--he leaps into the wave,
    To find a home, and not a grave.

      Anon I said I would not die;
    I loathed to live--I feared to die--
    So I went forward, till I stood
    Amid a marble solitude,
    A ruined town of ancient day.
    I rested where some steps away
    From other work of human hand
    Two solitary pillars stand,
    Two pillars on a wild hill side,
    Like sea-marks of a shrunken tide:
    Their shafts were by the sea-breeze worn,
    Beneath them waved the verdant corn;
    But a few paces from the crown
    Of that green summit, farther down,
    A fallen pillar on the plain,
    Slow sinking in the earth again,
    Bedding itself in dark black mould,
    Lay moveless, where it first had rolled.
    It once had been a pillar high,
    And pointing to the starry sky;
    But now lay prostrate, its own weight
    Now serving but to fix its state,
    To sink it in its earthy bed;
    I gazed, and to myself I said,
    “This pillar lying on the plain
    The hand of man might raise again,
    And set it as in former days;
    But the fall’n spirit who shall raise,
    What power on earth? what power in heaven?”
    How quickly was an answer given
    Unto this voice of my despair!
    But now I sat in silence there,
    I thought upon the vanished time,
    And my irrevocable prime,
    My baffled purpose, wasted years,
    My sin, my misery--and my tears
    Fell thick and fast upon the sands;
    I hid my face within my hands,
    For tears are strange that find their way
    Under the open eye of day,
    Under the broad and glorious sun,
    Full in the heavens, as mine have done,
    And as upon that day they did,
    Unnoticed, unrestrained, unchid.
    How long I might have felt them flow
    Without a check, I do not know,
    But presently, while yet I kept
    That attitude of woe, and wept,
    A mild voice sounded in mine ears--
    “You cannot wash your heart with tears!”
    I quickly turned--and, vexed to be
    Seen in my spirit’s agony,
    In anger had almost replied--
    An aged man was at my side;
    I think that since my life began,
    I never saw an older man,
    Than he who stood beside me then,
    And with mild accents said again:
    “You cannot cleanse your heart with tears,
    Though you should weep as many years
    As our great Father, when he sat
    Uncomforted on Ararat--
    This would not help you, and the tear
    Which does not heal, will scald and sear.
    What is your sorrow?”

                              Until now
    I never had unveiled my woe--
    Not that I shunned sweet sympathies,
    Man’s words, or woman’s pitying eyes;
    But that I felt they were in vain,
    And could not help me--for the pain,
    The wound which I was doomed to feel,
    Man gave not, and he could not heal.
    But in this old man’s speech and tone
    Was something that allured me on:
    I told him all--I did not hide
    My sin, my sorrow, or my pride:
    I told him how, when I began
    First to verge upward to a man,
    These thoughts were mine--to dwell alone,
    My spirit on its lordly throne,
    Hating the vain stir, fierce and loud,
    The din of the tumultuous crowd;
    And how I thought to arm my soul,
    And stablish it in self-controul;
    And said I would obey the right,
    And would be strong in wisdom’s might,
    And bow unto mine own heart’s law,
    And keep my heart from speck or flaw,
    That in its mirror I might find
    A reflex of the Eternal mind,
    A glass to give me back the truth--
    And how before me from my youth
    A phantom ever on the wing,
    Appearing now, now vanishing,
    Had flitted, looking out from shrine,
    From painting, or from work divine
    Of poet’s, or of sculptor’s art;
    And how I feared it might depart,
    That beauty which alone could shed
    Light on my life--and then I said,
    I would beneath its shadow dwell,
    And would all lovely things compel,
    All that was beautiful or fair
    In art or nature, earth or air,
    To be as ministers to me,
    To keep me pure, to keep me free
    From worldly service, from the chain
    Of custom, and from earthly stain;
    And how they kept me for a while,
    And did my foolish heart beguile;
    Yet all at last did faithless prove,
    And, late or soon, betrayed my love;
    How they had failed me one by one,
    Till now, when youth was scarcely done,
    My heart, which I had thought to steep
    In hues of beauty, and to keep
    Its consecrated home and fane,
    That heart was soiled with many a stain,
    Which from without and from within
    Had gathered there, till all was sin,
    Till now I only drew my breath,
    I lived but in the hope of death.

      While my last words were giving place
    To my heart’s anguish, o’er his face
    A shadow of displeasure past,
    But vanished then again as fast
    As the breeze-shadow from the brook;
    And with mild words and pitying look
    He gently said--
                      “Ah me, my son,
    A weary course your life has run;
    And yet it need not be in vain,
    That you have suffered all this pain;
    And, if mine years might make me bold
    To speak, methinks I could unfold
    Why in such efforts you could meet
    But only misery and defeat.
    Yet deem not of us as at strife,
    Because you set before your life
    A purpose and a loftier aim,
    Than the blind lives of men may claim
    For the most part--or that you sought,
    By fixed resolve and solemn thought,
    To lift your being’s calm estate
    Out of the range of time and fate.
    Glad am I that a thing unseen,
    A spiritual Presence, this has been
    Your worship, this your young heart stirred--
    But yet herein you proudly erred,
    Here may the source of woe be found,
    You thought to fling, yourself around,
    The atmosphere of light and love
    In which it was your joy to move--
    You thought by efforts of your own
    To take at last each jarring tone
    Out of your life, till all should meet
    In one majestic music sweet--
    Deeming that in our own heart’s ground
    The root of good was to be found,
    And that by careful watering
    And earnest tendance we might bring
    The bud, the blossom, and the fruit
    To grow and flourish from that root--
    You deemed we needed nothing more
    Than skill and courage to explore
    Deep down enough in our own heart,
    To where the well-head lay apart,
    Which must the springs of being feed,
    And that these fountains did but need
    The soil that choked them moved away,
    To bubble in the open day.
    But, thanks to heaven, it is not so,
    That root a richer soil doth know
    Than our poor hearts could e’er supply,
    That stream is from a source more high,
    From God it came, to God returns,
    Not nourished from our scanty urns,
    But fed from his unfailing river,
    Which runs and will run on for ever.”
    When now he came to heavenly things
    And spake of them, his spirit had wings,
    His words seemed not his own, but given--
    I could have deemed one spake from heaven
    Of hope and joy, of life and death,
    And immortality through faith,
    Of that great change commenced within,
    The blood that cleanses from all sin,
    That can wash out the inward stain,
    And consecrate the heart again,
    The voice that clearer and more clear
    Doth speak unto the purgèd ear,
    The gracious influences given
    In a continued stream from heaven,
    The balm that can the soul’s hurt heal,
    The Spirit’s witness and its seal.

      I listened, for unto mine ear
    The Word, which I had longed to hear,
    Was come at last, the lifeful word
    Which I had often almost heard
    In some deep silence of my breast--
    For with a sense of dim unrest
    That word unborn had often wrought,
    And struggled in the womb of thought,
    As from beneath the smothering earth
    The seed strives upward to a birth:
    And lo! it now was born indeed--
    Here was the answer to my need.

      But now we parted, never more
    To meet upon that lone sea-shore.
    We have not met on earth again,
    And scarcely shall--there doth remain
    A time, a place where we shall meet,
    And have the stars beneath our feet.
    Since then I many times have sought
    Who this might be, and sometimes thought
    It must have been an angel sent
    To be a special instrument
    And minister of grace to me,
    Or deemed again it might be He,
    Of whom some say he shall not die,
    Till he have seen with mortal eye
    The glory of his Lord again:
    But this is a weak thought and vain.

      We parted, each upon our way--
    I homeward, where my glad course lay
    Beside those ruins where I sate
    On the same morning--desolate,--
    With scarcely strength enough to grieve:
    And now it was a marvellous eve,
    The waters at my feet were bright,
    And breaking into isles of light:
    The misty sunset did enfold
    A thousand floating motes of gold;
    The red light seemed to penetrate
    Through the worn stone, and re-create
    The old, to glorify anew;
    And steeping all things through and through
    A rich dissolving splendour poured
    Through rent and fissure, and restored
    The fall’n, the falling and decayed,
    Filling the rifts which time had made,
    Till the rent masses seemed to meet,
    The pillar stand upon its feet,
    And tower and cornice, roof and stair
    Hung self-upheld in the magic air.
    Transfigured thus those temples stood
    Upon the margin of the flood,
    All glorious as they rose of yore,
    There standing, as not ever more
    They could be harmed by touch of time,
    But still, as in that perfect prime,
    Must flourish unremoved and free,
    Or as they then appeared to me,
    A newer and more glorious birth,
    A city of that other earth,
      That Earth which is to be.




         SONNET.


    What good soever in thy heart or mind
    Doth yet no higher source nor fountain own
    Than thine own self, nor bow to other throne--
    Suspect and fear--although therein thou find
    High purpose to go forth and bless thy kind,
    Or in the awful temple of thy soul
    To worship what is loveliest, and controul
    The ill within, and by strong laws to bind.
    Good is of God--and none is therefore sure
    That has dared wander from its source away:
    Laws without sanction will not long endure,
    Love will grow faint and fainter day by day,
    And Beauty from the straight path will allure,
    And weakening first, will afterwards betray.




         TO ----


    What maiden gathers flowers, who does not love[2]?
    And some have said, that none in summer bowers,
    Save lovers, wreathe them garlands of fresh flowers:
    O lady, of a purpose dost thou move
    Through garden walks, as willing to disprove
    This gentle faith; who, with uncareful hand,
    Hast culled a thousand thus at my command,
    Wherewith thou hast this dewy garland wove.
    There is no meaning in a thousand flowers--
    _One_ lily from its green stalk wouldst thou part,
    Or pluck, and to my bosom I will fold,
    One rose, selected from these wealthy bowers,
    Upgathering closely to its virgin heart
    An undivulgèd hoard of central gold.




         TO THE SAME.


    Look, dearest, what a glory from the sun
    Has fringed that cloud with silver edges bright,
    And how it seems to drink the golden light
    Of evening--you would think that it had won
    A splendour of its own: but lo! anon
    You shall behold a dark mass float away,
    Emptied of light and radiance, from the day,
    Its glory faded utterly and gone.
    And doubt not we should suffer the same loss
    As this weak vapour, which awhile did seem
    Translucent and made pure of all its dross,
    If, having shared the light, we should misdeem
    That light our own, or count we hold in fee
    That which we must receive continually.




         TO THE SAME.


    We live not in our moments or our years--
    The Present we fling from us like the rind
    Of some sweet Future, which we after find
    Bitter to taste, or bind _that_ in with fears,
    And water it beforehand with our tears--
    Vain tears for that which never may arrive:
    Meanwhile the joy whereby we ought to live
    Neglected or unheeded disappears.
    Wiser it were to welcome and make ours
    Whate’er of good, though small, the present brings--
    Kind greetings, sunshine, song of birds and flowers,
    With a child’s pure delight in little things;
    And of the griefs unborn to rest secure,
    Knowing that mercy ever will endure.




         TO THE SAME.


    If sorrow came not near us, and the lore
    Which wisdom-working sorrow best imparts,
    Found never time of entrance to our hearts,
    If we had won already a safe shore,
    Or if our changes were already o’er,
    Our pilgrim being we might quite forget,
    Our hearts but faintly on those mansions set,
    Where there shall be no sorrow any more.
    Therefore we will not be unwise to ask
    This, nor secure exemption from our share
    Of mortal suffering, and life’s drearier task--
    Not this, but grace our portion so to bear,
    That we may rest, when grief and pain are over,
    “With the meek Son of our Almighty Lover.”




         TO THE SAME.


    O dowered with a searching glance to see
    Quite through the hollow masks, wherewith the bare
    And worthless shows of greatness vizored are,
    This lore thou hast, because all things to thee
    Are proven by the absolute decree
    Of duty, and whatever will not square
    With that “prime wisdom,” though of seeming fair
    Or stately, thou rejectest faithfully.
    Till chidden in thy strength, each random aim
    Of good, whose aspect heavenward does not turn,
    Shrinks self-rebuked--thou looking kindliest blame
    From the calm region of thine eyes, that burn
    With tempered but continuous flashes bright,
    Like the mild lightnings of a tropic night.




         A LEGEND OF ALHAMBRA.


   The tradition on which the following Ballad is founded
   is an existing one, and exactly as it is here recounted
   was narrated to the author during his stay at Granada.

    O hymned in many a poet’s strain,
      Alhambra, by enchanter’s hand
    Exalted on this throne of Spain,
      A marvel of the land,

    The last of thy imperial race,
      Alhambra, when he overstept
    Thy portal’s threshold, turned his face--
      He turned his face and wept.

    In sooth it was a thing to weep,
      If then, as now, the level plain
    Beneath was spreading like the deep,
      The broad unruffled main:

    If, like a watch-tower of the sun,
      Above the Alpujarras rose,
    Streaked, when the dying day was done,
      With evening’s roseate snows.

    Thy founts yet make a pleasant sound,
      And the twelve lions, couchant yet,
    Sustain their ponderous burthen, round
      The marble basin set.

    But never, when the moon is bright
      O’er hill and golden-sanded stream,
    And thy square turrets in the light
      And taper columns gleam,

    Will village maiden dare to fill
      Her pitcher from that basin wide,
    But rather seeks a niggard rill
      Far down the steep hill-side!

    It was an Andalusian maid,
      With rose and pink-enwoven hair,
    Who told me what the fear that stayed
      Their footsteps from that stair:

    How, rising from that watery floor,
      A Moorish maiden, in the gleam
    Of the wan moonlight, stands before
      The stirrer of the stream:

    And mournfully she begs the grace,
      That they would speak the words divine,
    And sprinkling water in her face,
      Would make the sacred sign.

    And whosoe’er will grant this boon,
      Returning with the morrow’s light,
    Shall find the fountain pavement strewn
      With gold and jewels bright:

    A regal gift--for once, they say,
      Her father ruled this broad domain,
    The last who kept beneath his sway
      This pleasant place of Spain.

    It surely is a fearful doom,
      That one so beautiful should have
    No present quiet in her tomb,
      No hope beyond the grave.

    It must be, that some amulet
      Doth make all human pity vain,
    Or that upon her brow is set
      The silent seal of pain,

    Which none can meet--else long ago,
      Since many gentle hearts are there,
    Some spirit, touched by joy or woe,
      Had answered to her prayer.

    But so it is, that till this hour
      That mournful child beneath the moon
    Still rises from her watery bower,
      To urge this simple boon--

    To beg, as all have need of grace,
      That they would speak the words divine,
    And, sprinkling water in her face,
      Would make the sacred sign.




         ENGLAND.


    Peace, Freedom, Happiness, have loved to wait
    On the fair islands, fenced by circling seas,
    And ever of such favoured spots as these
    Have the wise dreamers dreamed, that would create
    That perfect model of a happy state,
    Which the world never saw. Oceana,
    Utopia such, and Plato’s isle that lay
    Westward of Gades and the Great Sea’s gate.
    Dreams are they all, which yet have helped to make
    That underneath fair polities we dwell,
    Though marred in part by envy, faction, hate--
    Dreams which are dear, dear England, for thy sake,
    Who art indeed that sea-girt citadel,
    And nearest image of that perfect state.




         THE ISLAND OF MADEIRA.


    Though never axe until a later day
    Assailed thy forests’ huge antiquity,
    Yet elder Fame had many tales of thee--
    Whether Phœnician shipman far astray
    Had brought uncertain notices away
    Of islands dreaming in the middle sea;
    Or that man’s heart, which struggles to be free
    From the old worn-out world, had never stay
    Till, for a place to rest on, it had found
    A region out of ken, that happier isle,
    Which the mild ocean breezes blow around,
    Where they who thrice upon this mortal stage
    Had kept their hands from wrong, their hearts from guile,
    Should come at length, and live a tearless age.




         GIBRALTAR.


    England, we love thee better than we know--
    And this I learned, when after wanderings long
    ’Mid people of another stock and tongue,
    I heard again thy martial music blow,
    And saw thy gallant children to and fro
    Pace, keeping ward at one of those huge gates,
    Which like twin giants watch the Herculean straits:
    When first I came in sight of that brave show,
    It made my very heart within me dance,
    To think that thou thy proud foot shouldst advance
    Forward so far into the mighty sea;
    Joy was it and exultation to behold
    Thine ancient standard’s rich emblazonry,
    A glorious picture by the wind unrolled.




         ENGLAND.


    We look for, and have promise to behold
    A better country, such as earth has none--
    Yet, England, am I still thy duteous son,
    And never will this heart be dead or cold
    At the relation of thy glories old,
    Or of what newer triumphs thou hast won,
    Where thou as with a mighty arm hast done
    The work of God, quelling the tyrants bold.
    Elect of nations, for the whole world’s good
    Thou wert exalted to a doom so high--
    To outbrave Rome’s “triple tyrant,” to confound
    Every oppressor, that with impious flood
    Would drown the landmarks of humanity,
    The limits God hath set to nations and their bound[3].




         POLAND, 1831.


    The nations may not be trod out, and quite
    Obliterated from the world’s great page--
    The nations, that have filled from age to age
    Their place in story. They who in despite
    Of this, a people’s first and holiest right,
    In lust of unchecked power or brutal rage,
    Against a people’s life such warfare wage,
    With man no more, but with the Eternal fight.
    They who break down the barriers He hath set,
    Break down what would another time defend
    And shelter their own selves: they who forget
    (For the indulgence of the present will)
    The lasting ordinances, in the end
    Will rue their work, when ill shall sanction ill.




         TO NICHOLAS, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA.

         ON HIS REPORTED CONDUCT TOWARDS THE POLES.


    What would it help to call thee what thou art?
    When all is spoken, thou remainest still
    With the same power and the same evil will
    To crush a nation’s life out, to dispart
    All holiest ties, to turn awry and thwart
    All courses that kind nature keeps, to spill
    The blood of noblest veins, to maim, or kill
    With torture of slow pain the aching heart.
    When our weak hands hang useless, and we feel
    Deeds cannot be, who then would ease his breast
    With the impotence of words? But our appeal
    Is unto Him, who counts a nation’s tears,
    With whom are the oppressor and opprest,
    And vengeance, and the recompensing years.




         ON THE RESULTS OF THE LAST FRENCH REVOLUTION.


    How long shall weary nations toil in blood,
    How often roll the still returning stone
    Up the sharp painful height, ere they will own
    That on the base of individual good,
    Of virtue, manners, and pure homes endued
    With household graces--that on this alone
    Shall social freedom stand--where these are gone,
    There is a nation doomed to servitude?
    O suffering, toiling France, thy toil is vain!
    The irreversible decree stands sure,
    Where men are selfish, covetous of gain,
    Heady and fierce, unholy and impure,
    Their toil is lost, and fruitless all their pain;
    They cannot build a work which shall endure.




         TO ENGLAND.

         A SEQUEL TO THE FOREGOING.


    Thy duteous loving children fear for thee
    In one thing chiefly--for thy pure abodes
    And thy undesecrated household Gods,
    Thou most religious, and for this most free,
    Of all the nations. Oh! look out and see
    The injuries which she, who in the name
    Of liberty thy fellowship would claim,
    Has done to virtue and to liberty;
    Whose philtres have corrupted everywhere
    The living springs men drink of, all save thine.
    Oh! then of her and of her love beware!
    Better again eight hundred years of strife,
    Than give her leave to sap and undermine
    The deep foundations of thy moral life.




         SONNET.


    You say we love not freedom, honoured friend;
    Yea, doubtless, we can lend to scheme like yours
    Small love. Yet not for this--that it assures
    Too much to man--this would not me offend:
    But for I know that all such schemes will end
    With leaving him too little,--will deprive
    Of that free energy by which we live:
    For of such plots the final act attend--
    See them who loathed the very name of king,
    Emulous in slavery, bow their souls before
    The new-coined title of some meaner thing
    Than ever crown of king or emperor wore;
    For such in God’s and Nature’s righteousness,
    The weakness which avenges all excess.




         SONNET TO SILVIO PELLICO,

         ON READING THE ACCOUNT OF HIS IMPRISONMENT.


    Ah! who may guess, who yet was never tried
    How fearful the temptation to reply
    With wrong for wrong, yea fiercely to defy
    In spirit, even when action is denied?
    Therefore praise waits on thee, not drawn aside
    By this strong lure of hell--on thee whose eye
    Being formed by love, could every where descry
    Love, or some workings unto love allied--
    And benediction on the grace that dealt
    So with thy soul--and prayer, more earnest prayer,
    Intenser longing than before we felt
    For all that in dark places lying are,
    For captives in strange lands, for them who pine
    In depth of dungeon, or in sunless mine[4].




         TO THE SAME.


    Songs of deliverance compassed thee about,
    Long ere thy prison doors were backward flung:
    When first thy heart to gentle thoughts was strung,
    A song arose in heaven, an angel shout
    For one delivered from the hideous rout,
    That with defiance and fierce mutual hate
    Do each the other’s griefs exasperate.
    Thou, loving, from thy grief hadst taken out
    Its worst--for who is captive or a slave
    But He, who from that dungeon and foul grave,
    His own dark soul, refuses to come forth
    Into the light and liberty above?
    Or whom may we call wretched on this earth
    Save only him who has left off to love?




         FROM THE SPANISH.


    Who ever such adventure yet,
      Or a like delight has known,
    To that which Count Arnaldo met
      On the morning of St. John?

    He had gone forth beside the sea,
      With his falcon on his hand,
    And saw a pinnace fast and free,
      That was making to the land.

    And he that by the rudder stood
      As he went was singing still,
    “My galley, oh my galley good,
      Heaven protect thee from all ill;

    “From all the dangers and the woe
      That on ocean’s waters wait,
    Almeria’s reefs and shallows low,
      And Gibraltar’s stormy strait.

    “From Venice and its shallow way,
      From the shoals of Flanders’ coast,
    And from the gulf of broad Biscay,
      Where the dangers are the most.”

    Then Count Arnaldo spoke aloud,
      You might hear his accents well--
    “Those words, thou mariner, I would
      Unto me that thou wouldst tell.”

    To him that mariner replied
      In a courteous tone, but free--
    “I never sing that song,” he cried,
      “Save to one who sails with me.”




         LINES.


    Not thou from us, O Lord, but we
    Withdraw ourselves from thee.

    When we are dark and dead,
    And Thou art covered with a cloud,
    Hanging before Thee, like a shroud,
    So that our prayer can find no way,
    Oh! teach us that we do not say,
    “Where is _thy_ brightness fled?”

    But that we search and try
    What in ourselves has wrought this blame;
    For thou remainest still the same;
    But earth’s own vapours earth may fill
    With darkness and thick clouds, while still
    The sun is in the sky.




         TO A FRIEND ENTERING THE MINISTRY.


         I.

    High thoughts at first, and visions high
    Are ours of easy victory;
    The word we bear seems so divine,
    So framed for Adam’s guilty line,
      That none, unto ourselves we say,
    Of all his sinning suffering race,
    Will hear that word, so full of grace,
      And coldly turn away.


         II.

    But soon a sadder mood comes round--
    High hopes have fallen to the ground,
    And the ambassadors of peace
    Go weeping, that men will not cease
      To strive with heaven--they weep and mourn,
    That suffering men will not be blest,
    That weary men refuse to rest,
      And wanderers to return.


         III.

    Well is it, if has not ensued
    Another and a worser mood,
    When all unfaithful thoughts have way,
    When we hang down our hands, and say,
      Alas! it is a weary pain,
    To seek with toil and fruitless strife
    To chafe the numbed limbs into life,
      That will not live again.


         IV.

    Then if Spring odours on the wind
    Float by, they bring into our mind
    That it were wiser done, to give
    Our hearts to Nature, and to live
      For her--or in the student’s bower
    To search into her hidden things,
    And seek in books the wondrous springs
      Of knowledge and of power.


         V.

    Or if we dare not thus draw back,
    Yet oh! to shun the crowded track
    And the rude throng of men! to dwell
    In hermitage or lonely cell,
      Feeding all longings that aspire
    Like incense heavenward, and with care
    And lonely vigil nursing there
      Faith’s solitary pyre.


         VI.

    Oh! let not us this thought allow--
    The heat, the dust upon our brow,
    Signs of the contest, we may wear:
    Yet thus we shall appear more fair
      In our Almighty Master’s eye,
    Than if in fear to lose the bloom,
    Or ruffle the soul’s lightest plume,
      We from the strife should fly.


         VII.

    And for the rest, in weariness,
    In disappointment, or distress,
    When strength decays, or hope grows dim,
    We ever may recur to Him,
      Who has the golden oil divine,
    Wherewith to feed our failing urns,
    Who watches every lamp that burns
      Before his sacred shrine.




         TO A CHILD, PLAYING.


    Dear boy, thy momentary laughter rings
      Sincerely out, and that spontaneous glee,
    Seeming to need no hint from outward things,
      Breaks forth in sudden shoutings, loud and free.

    From what hid fountains doth thy joyance flow,
      That borrows nothing from the world around?
    Its springs must deeper lie than we can know,
      A well whose springs lie safely underground.

    So be it ever--and thou happy boy,
      When Time, that takes these wild delights away,
    Gives thee a measure of sedater joy,
      Which, unlike this, shall ever with thee stay;--

    Then may that joy, like this, to outward things
      Owe nothing--but lie safe beneath the sod,
    A hidden fountain fed from unseen springs,
      From the glad-making river of our God.




         THE HERRING-FISHERS OF LOCHFYNE.


    Deem not these fishers idle, though by day
    You hear the snatches of their lazy song,
    And see them listlessly the sunlight long
    Strew the curved beach of this indented bay:
    So deemed I, till I viewed their trim array
    Of boats last night,--a busy armament,
    With sails as dark as ever Theseus bent
    Upon his fatal rigging, take their way.
    Rising betimes, I could not choose but look
    For their return, and when along the lake
    The morning mists were curling, saw them make
    Homeward, returning toward their quiet nook,
    With draggled nets down hanging to the tide,
    Weary, and leaning o’er their vessels’ side.




         IN THE ISLE OF MULL.


    The clouds are gathering in their western dome,
    Deep-drenched with sunlight, as a fleece with dew,
    While I with baffled effort still pursue
    And track these waters toward their mountain home,
    In vain--though cataract, and mimic foam,
    And island-spots, round which the streamlet threw
    Its sister arms, which joyed to meet anew,
    Have lured me on, and won me still to roam;
    Till now, coy nymph, unseen thy waters pass,
    Or faintly struggle through the twinkling grass--
    And I, thy founts unvisited, return.
    Is it that thou art revelling with thy peers?
    Or dost thou feed a solitary urn,
    Else unreplenished, with thine own sad tears?




         THE SAME.


    Sweet Water-nymph, more shy than Arethuse,
    Why wilt thou hide from me thy green retreat,
    Where duly Thou with silver-sandalled feet,
    And every Naiad, her green locks profuse,
    Welcome with dance sad evening, or unloose,
    To share your revel, an oak-cinctured throng,
    Oread and Dryad, who the daylight long
    By rock, or cave, or antique forest, use
    To shun the Wood-god and his rabble bold?
    Such comes not now, or who with impious strife
    Would seek to untenant meadow stream and plain
    Of that indwelling power, which is the life
    And which sustaineth each, which poets old
    As god and goddess thus have loved to feign.




         AT SEA.


    The sea is like a mirror far and near,
    And ours a prosperous voyage, safe from harms;
    And yet the sense that everlasting arms
    Are round us and about us, is as dear
    Now when no sight of danger doth appear,
    As though our vessel did its blind way urge
    ’Mid the long weltering of the dreariest surge,
    Through which a perishing bark did ever steer.
    Lord of the calm and tempest, be it ours,
    Poor mariners! to pay due vows to thee,
    Though not a cloud on all the horizon lowers
    Of all our life--for even so shall we
    Have greater boldness towards thee, when indeed
    The storm is up, and there is earnest need.




         AN EVENING IN FRANCE.


    One star is shining in the crimson eve,
    And the thin texture of the faint blue sky
    Above is like a veil intensely drawn;
    Upon the spirit with a solemn weight
    The marvel and the mystery of eve
    Is lying, as all holy thoughts and calm,
    By the vain stir and tumult of the day
    Chased far away, come back on tranquil wing,
    Like doves returning to their noted haunts.
    It is the solemn even-tide--the hour
    Of holy musings, and to us no less
    Of sweet refreshment for the bodily frame
    Than for the spirit, harassed both and worn
    With a long day of travel; and methinks
    It must have been an evening such as this,
    After a day of toilsome journeyings o’er,
    When looking out on Tiber, as we now
    Look out on this fair river flowing by,
    Together sat the saintly Monica[5],
    And with her, given unto her prayers, that son,
    The turbid stream of whose tumultuous youth
    Now first was running clear and bright and smooth,
    And solitary sitting in the niche
    Of a deep window held delightful talk--
    Such as they never could have known before,
    While a deep chasm, deeper than natural love
    Could e’er bridge over, lay betwixt their souls--
    Of what must be the glorious life in heaven.
    And looking forth on meadow, stream, and sky,
    And on the golden west, that richest glow
    Of sunset to the uncreated light,
    Which must invest for ever those bright worlds,
    Seemed darkness, and the best that earth can give,
    Its noblest pleasures, they with one consent
    Counted as vile, nor once to be compared--
    Oh! rather say not worthy to be named
    With what is to be looked for there; and thus
    Leaving behind them all things which are seen,
    By many a stately stair they did ascend
    Above the earth and all created things,
    The sun and starry heavens--yea, and above
    The mind of man, until they did attain
    Where light no shadow has, and life no death,
    Where past or future are not, nor can be,
    But an eternal present, and the Lamb
    His people feeds from indeficient streams.
    Then pausing for a moment, as to taste
    That river of delights, at length they cried,
    Oh! to be thus for ever, and to hear
    Thus in the silence of the lower world,
    And in the silence of all thoughts that keep
    Vain stir within, unutterable words,
    And with the splendour of His majesty,
    Whose seat is in the middle of the throne,
    Thus to be fed for ever--this must be
    The beatific vision, the third heaven.
    What we have for these passing moments known,
    To know the same for ever--this would be
    That life whereof even now we held debate.
    When will it be? oh when?

                          These things they said,
    And for a season breathed immortal air,
    But then perforce returned to earth again:
    For the air on those first summits is too fine
    For our long breathing, while we yet have on
    Our gross investiture of mortal weeds.

      Yet not for nothing had their spirits flown
    To those high regions, bringing back at once
    A reconcilement with the mean things here,
    And a more earnest longing for what there
    Of nobler was by partial glimpses thus
    Seen through the crannies of the prison house.
    And she, that mother--such entire content
    Possessed her bosom, and her Lord had filled
    The orb of her desires so round and full,
    Had answered all her prayers for her lost son
    With such an overmeasure of his grace,
    She had no more to ask, and did not know
    Why she should tarry any longer here,
    Nor what she did on earth. Thus then she felt,
    And to these thoughts which overflowed her heart
    Gave thankful utterance meet; nor many days
    After this vision and foretaste of joy,
    Inherited the substance of the things
    Which she had seen, and entered into peace.




         SONNET.

         TO MY CHILD--A FELLOW-TRAVELLER.


    How of a sudden Sleep has laid on thee
    His heavy hand--on thee, for ever blest,
    Sleeping or waking, stirring or at rest:
    But now thou wert exulting merrily,
    And in the very middle of thy glee
    Thy head thou layedst on thy father’s breast,
    There seeming to have found a peacefuller nest
    Than one would think might in this loud world be.
    There were no need to fear thy worser mood,
    Striving in years to come against the good
    He would impart, if thou couldst keep in mind
    How many times, the while with anxious care
    He sought to screen thee from the chilling air,
    Upon his bosom thou hast slept reclined.




         THE DESCENT OF THE RHONE.


    Often when my thought has been
    Pondering on what solemn scene,
    Which of all the glorious shows
    Nature can at will disclose,
    Once beholden by the eye,
    Ever after would supply
    Most unto the musing heart
    Of memories which should not depart--
    It has seemed no ampler dower
    Of her beauty or her power
    We could win, than night and day,
    An illimitable way,
    To sail down some mighty river,
    Sailing as we would sail for ever.

      Lo! my wish is almost won,
    Broadly flows the stately Rhone,
    And we loosen from the shore
    Our light pinnace, long before
    The young East in gorgeous state
    Has unlocked his ruby gate,
    And our voyage is not done
    At the sinking of the sun;
    But for us the azure Night
    Feeds her golden flocks with light:
    Ours are all the hues of heaven,
    Sights and sounds of morn and even;
    In our view the day is born;
    First the stars of lustre shorn,
    Until Hesper, he who last
    Kept his splendour, now fades fast;
    A faint bloom over heaven is spread,
    And the clouds blush deeper red,
    Till from them the stream below
    Catches the same roseate glow;
    The pale east lightens into gold,
    And the west is with the fold
    Of the mantle of dim night
    Scarcely darkened or less bright--
    Till, his way prepared, at length
    Rising up in golden strength,
    Tramples the victorious sun
    The dying stars out, one by one.

      Fairer scene the opening eye
    Of the day can scarce descry--
    Fairer sight he looks not on
    Than the pleasant banks of Rhone;
    Where in terraces and ranks,
    On those undulating banks,
    Rise by many a hilly stair
    Sloping tiers of vines, where’er
    From the steep and stony soil
    Has been won by careful toil,
    And with long laborious pains
    Fenced against the washing rains,
    Fenced and anxiously walled round,
    A little patch of garden ground.
    Higher still some place of power,
    Or a solitary tower,
    Ruined now, is looking down
    On some quiet little town
    In a sheltered glen beneath,
    Where the smoke’s unbroken wreath,
    Mounting in the windless air,
    Rests, dissolving slowly there,
    O’er the housetops like a cloud,
    Or a thinnest vapourous shroud.

      Morn has been, and lo! how soon
    Has arrived the middle noon,
    And the broad sun’s rays do rest
    On some naked mountain’s breast,
    Where alone relieve the eye
    Massive shadows, as they lie
    In the hollows motionless;
    Still our boat doth onward press.
    Now a peaceful current wide
    Bears it on an ample tide,
    Now the hills retire, and then
    Their broad fronts advance again,
    Till the rocks have closed us round,
    And would seem our course to bound,
    But anon a way appears,
    And our vessel onward steers,
    Darting swiftly as between
    Narrow walls of a ravine.

      Morn has been and noon--and now
    Evening falls about our prow:
    But the sunken sunset still
    Burns behind the western hill;
    Lo! the starry troop again
    Gather on the ethereal plain;
    Even now and there were none,
    And a moment since but one;
    And anon we lift our head,
    And all heaven is overspread
    With a still assembling crowd,
    With a silent multitude--
    Venus, first and brightest set
    In the night’s pale coronet,
    Armed Orion’s belted pride,
    And the Seven that by the side
    Of the Titan nightly weave
    Dances in the mystic eve,
    Sisters linked in love and light;
    ’Twere in truth a solemn sight,
    Were we sailing now as they,
    Who upon their western way
    To the isles of spice and gold,
    Nightly watching, might behold
    These our constellations dip,
    And the great sign of the Ship
    Rise upon the other hand,
    With the Cross that seems to stand
    In the vault of heaven upright,
    Marking the middle hour of night--
    Or with them whose keels first prest
    The mighty rivers of the west,
    Who the first with bold intent
    Down the Orellana went,[6]
    Or a dangerous progress won
    On the mighty Amazon,
    By whose ocean-streams they tell
    How yet the warrior-maidens dwell.

      But the Fancy may not roam;
    Thou wilt keep it nearer home,
    Friend, of earthly friends the best,
    Who on this fair river’s breast
    Sailest with me fleet and fast,
    As the unremitting blast
    With a steady breath and strong
    Urges our light boat along.
    We this day have found delight
    In each pleasant sound and sight
    Of this river bright and fair,
    And in things which flowing are
    Like a stream, yet without blame
    These my passing song may claim,
    Or thy hearing may beguile,
    If we not forget the while,
    That we are from childhood’s morn
    On a mightier river borne,
    Which is rolling evermore
    To a sea without a shore,
    Life the river, and the sea
    That we seek--eternity.
    We may sometimes sport and play,
    And in thought keep holiday,
    So we ever own a law,
    Living in habitual awe,
    And beneath the constant stress
    Of a solemn thoughtfulness,
    Weighing whither this life tends,
    For what high and holy ends
    It was lent us, whence it flows,
    And its current whither goes.

      There is ample matter here
    For as much of thought and fear,
    As will solemnize our souls--
    Thought of how this river rolls
    Over millions wrecked before
    They could reach that happy shore,
    Where we have not anchored yet;
    Of the dangers which beset
    Our own way, of hidden shoal,
    Waters smoothest where they roll
    Over point of sunken rock,
    Treacherous calm, and sudden shock
    Of the storm, which can assail
    No boat than ours more weak or frail--
    Matter not alone of sadness,
    But no less of thankful gladness,
    That, whichever way we turn,
    There are steady lights that burn
    On the shore, and lamps of love
    In the gloomiest sky above,
    Which will guide our bark aright
    Through the darkness of our night--
    Many a fixed unblinking star
    Unto them that wandering are
    Through this blindly-weltering sea.
    Themes of high and thoughtful glee,
    When we think we are not left,
    Of all solaces bereft,
    Each to hold, companionless,
    Through a watery wilderness,
    Unaccompanied our way,
    As we can--this I may say,
    Whatsoever else betide,
    With thee sitting at my side,
    And this happy cherub sweet,
    Playing, laughing at my feet.




         ON THE PERSEUS AND MEDUSA OF BENVENUTO CELLINI.


    In what fierce spasms upgathered, on the plain
    Medusa’s headless corpse has quivering sunk,
    While all the limbs of that undying trunk
    To their extremest joint with torture strain;
    But the calm visage has resumed again
    Its beauty,--the orbed eyelids are let down,
    As though a living sleep might once more crown
    Their placid circlets, guiltless of all pain.
    And Thou--is thine the spirit’s swift recoil,
    Which follows every deed of acted wrath,
    That holding in thine hand this lovely spoil,
    Thou dost not triumph, feeling that the breath
    Of life is sacred, whether it inform,
    Loathly or beauteous, man or beast or worm?




         LINES.

         WRITTEN AT THE VILLAGE OF PASSIGNANO, ON THE LAKE OF THRASYMENE.


    The mountains stand about the quiet lake,
    That not a breath its azure calm may break;
    No leaf of these sere olive trees is stirred,
    In the near silence far-off sounds are heard;
    The tiny bat is flitting overhead,
    The hawthorn doth its richest odours shed
    Into the dewy air; and over all
    Veil after veil the evening shadows fall,
    And one by one withdraw each glimmering height,
    The far, and then the nearer, from our sight--
    No sign surviving in this tranquil scene;
    That strife and savage tumult here have been.

      But if the pilgrim to the latest plain
    Of carnage, where the blood like summer rain
    Fell but the other day; if in his mind
    He marvels much and oftentimes to find
    With what success has Nature each sad trace
    Of man’s red footmarks laboured to efface--
    What wonder is it, if this spot appears
    Guiltless of strife, when now two thousand years
    Of daily reparation have gone by,
    Since it resumed its own tranquillity.
    This calm has nothing strange, yet not the less
    This holy evening’s solemn quietness,
    The perfect beauty of this windless lake,
    This stillness which no harsher murmurs break
    Than the frogs croaking from the distant sedge,
    These vineyards drest unto the water’s edge,
    This hind that homeward driving the slow steer,
    Tells that man’s daily work goes forward here,
    Have each a power upon me, while I drink
    The influence of the placid time, and think
    How gladly that sweet Mother once again
    Resumes her sceptre and benignant reign,
    But for a few short instants scared away
    By the mad game, the cruel impious fray
    Of her distempered children--how comes back,
    And leads them in the customary track
    Of blessing once again; to order brings
    Anew the dislocated frame of things,
    And covers up, and out of sight conceals
    What they have wrought of ill, or gently heals.




         VESUVIUS, AS SEEN FROM CAPRI.


    A wreath of light blue vapour, pure and rare,
    Mounts, scarcely seen against the bluer sky,
    In quiet adoration, silently--
    Till the faint currents of the upper air
    Dislimn it, and it forms, dissolving there,
    The dome, as of a palace, hung on high
    Over the mountain--underneath it lie
    Vineyards and hays and cities white and fair.
    Might we not hope this beauty would engage
    All living things unto one pure delight?
    A vain belief!--for here, our records tell,
    Rome’s understanding tyrant from men’s sight
    Hid, as within a guilty citadel,
    The shame of his dishonourable age.




         VESUVIUS.


    As when unto a mother, having chid
    Her child in anger, there have straight ensued
    Repentings for her quick and angry mood,
    That she would fain see all its traces hid
    Quite out of sight--even so has Nature bid
    Fair flowers, that on the scarred earth she has strewed,
    To blossom, and called up the taller wood
    To cover what she ruined and undid.
    Oh! and her mood of anger did not last
    More than an instant, but her work of peace,
    Restoring and repairing, comforting
    The earth, her stricken child, will never cease;
    For that was her strange work, and quickly past,
    To this her genial toil no end the years shall bring.




         THE SAME, CONTINUED.


    That her destroying fury was with noise
    And sudden uproar--but far otherwise,
    With silent and with secret ministries,
    Her skill of renovation she employs:
    For Nature, only loud when she destroys,
    Is silent when she fashions. She will crowd
    The work of her destruction, transient, loud,
    Into an hour, and then long peace enjoys.
    Yea, every power that fashions and upholds
    Works silently--all things whose life is sure,
    Their life is calm--silent the light that moulds
    And colours all things; and without debate
    The stars, which are for ever to endure,
    Assume their thrones and their unquestioned state.




         TO ENGLAND.

         WRITTEN AFTER A VISIT TO SORRENTO.


    They are but selfish visions at the best,
    Which tempt us to desire that we were free
    From the dear ties that bind us unto Thee,
    That so we might take up our lasting rest,
    Where some delightful spot, some hidden nest
    In brighter lands has pleased our phantasy:
    And might such vows at once accomplished be,
    We should not in the accomplishment be blest,
    But oh! most miserable, if it be true
    Peace only waits upon us, while we do
    Heaven’s work and will: for what is it we ask,
    When we would fain have leave to linger here,
    But to abandon our appointed task,
    Our place of duty and our natural sphere?




             LINES.

       WRITTEN AFTER HEARING SOME BEAUTIFUL
      SINGING IN A CONVENT CHURCH AT ROME.


    Sweet voices! seldom mortal ear
    Strains of such potency might hear;
    My soul, that listened, seemed quite gone,
    Dissolved in sweetness, and anon
    I was borne upward, till I trod
    Among the hierarchy of God.
    And when they ceased, as time must bring
    An end to every sweetest thing,
    With what reluctancy came back
    My spirits to their wonted track,
    And how I loathed the common life,
    The daily and recurring strife
    With petty sins, the lowly road
    And being’s ordinary load.
    Why after such a solemn mood
    Should any meaner thought intrude?
    Why will not heaven hereafter give,
    That we for evermore may live
    Thus at our spirit’s topmost bent?
    This said I in my discontent.

      But give me, Lord, a wiser heart;
    These seasons come, and they depart,
    These seasons, and those higher still,
    When we are given to have our fill
    Of strength and life and joy with thee,
    And brightness of thy face to see.
    They come, or we could never guess
    Of heaven’s sublimer blessedness;
    They come, to be our strength and cheer
    In other times, in doubt or fear,
    Or should our solitary way
    Lie through the desert many a day.
    They go, they leave us blank and dead,
    That we may learn, when they are fled,
    We are but vapours which have won
    A moment’s brightness from the sun,
    And which it may at pleasure fill
    With splendour, or unclothe at will.
    Well for us they do not abide,
    Or we should lose ourselves in pride,
    And be as angels--but as they
    Who on the battlements of day
    Walked, gazing on their power and might,
    Till they grew giddy in their height.

      Then welcome every nobler time,
    When, out of reach of earth’s dull chime,
    ’Tis ours to drink with purgèd ears
    The music of the solemn spheres,
    Or in the desert to have sight
    Of those enchanted cities bright,
    Which sensual eye can never see:
    Thrice welcome may such seasons be.
    But welcome too the common way,
    The lowly duties of the day,
    And all which makes and keeps us low,
    Which teaches us ourselves to know,
    That we, who do our lineage high
    Draw from beyond the starry sky,
    Are yet upon the other side
    To earth and to its dust allied.




         ON A PICTURE OF THE ASSUMPTION BY MURILLO.


    With what calm power thou risest on the wind--
    Mak’st thou a pinion of those locks unshorn?
    Or of that dark blue robe which floats behind
    In ample fold? or art thou cloud-upborne?

    A crescent moon is bent beneath thy feet,
    Above the heavens expand, and tier o’er tier
    With heavenly garlands thy advance to greet,
    The cloudy throng of cherubim appear.

    There is a glory round thee, and mine eyes
    Are dazzled, for I know not whence it came,
    Since never in the light of western skies
    The island clouds burned with so pure a flame:

    Nor were those flowers of our dull common mould,
    But nurtured on some amaranthine bed,
    Nearer the sun, remote from storms and cold,
    By purer dews and warmer breezes fed.

    Well may we be perplexed and sadly wrought,
    That we can guess so ill what dreams were thine,
    Ere from the chambers of thy silent thought
    That face looked out on thee, Painter divine.

    What innocence, what love, what loveliness,
    What purity must have familiar been
    Unto thy soul, before it could express
    The holy beauty in that visage seen.

    And so, if we would understand thee right,
    And the diviner portion of thine art,
    We must exalt our spirits to thine height,
    Nor wilt thou else the mystery impart.




         AN INCIDENT VERSIFIED.


    Far in the south there is a jutting ledge
    Of rocks, scarce peering o’er the water’s edge,
    Where earliest come the fresh Atlantic gales,
    That in their course have filled a thousand sails,
    And brushed for leagues and leagues the Atlantic deep,
    Till now they make the nimble spirit leap
    Beneath their lifeful and renewing breath,
    And stir it like the ocean depths beneath.
    Two that were strangers to that sunny land,
    And to each other, met upon this strand;
    One seemed to keep so slight a hold of life,
    That when he willed, without the spirit’s strife,
    He might let go--a flower upon a ledge
    Of verdant meadow by a river’s edge,
    Which ever loosens with its treacherous flow
    In gradual lapse the moistened soil below;
    While to the last in beauty and in bloom
    That flower is scattering incense o’er its tomb,
    And with the dews upon it, and the breath
    Of the fresh morning round it, sinks to death.

      They met the following day, and many more
    They paced together this low ridge of shore,
    Till one fair eve, the other with intent
    To lure him out, unto his chamber went;
    But straight retired again with noiseless pace,
    For with a subtle gauze flung o’er his face
    Upon his bed he lay, serene and still
    And quiet, even as one who takes his fill
    Of a delight he does not fear to lose.
    So blest he seemed, the other could not choose
    To wake him, but went down the narrow stair;
    And when he met an aged attendant there,
    She ceased her work to tell him, when he said,
    Her patient then on happy slumber fed,
    But that anon he would return once more,--
    Her inmate had expired an hour before.

          ------

    I know not by what chance he thus was thrown
    On a far shore, untended and alone,
    To live or die; for, as I after learned,
    There were in England many hearts that yearned
    To know his safety, and such tears were shed
    For him as grace the living and the dead.




         ADDRESSED ON LEAVING ROME TO A FRIEND RESIDING IN THAT CITY.


    O lately written in the roll of friends,
    O written late, not last, three pleasant months
    Under the shadow of the Capitol,
    A pleasant time, made pleasanter by thee,
    It has been mine to pass--three months of spring,
    Which pleasant in themselves and for thy sake,
    Had yet this higher, that they stirred in the heart
    The motions of continual thankfulness
    To me, considering by what gracious paths
    I had been guided, by what paths of love,
    Since I was last a dweller in these gates.
    That meditation could not prove to me
    But as a spring that ever bubbles up,
    Sparkling in the face of heaven, when every day
    Reminded me how little gladness then
    I gathered from these things, but now how much.

      For tho’ not then indifferent to me
    Nature or art, yea rather tho’ from these
    I drew whatever lightened for a while
    The burden of our life and weary load;
    Yet seldom could I summon heart enough,
    With all their marvels round me, to go forth
    In quest of any. But some lonely spot,
    Some ridge of ruin fringed with cypresses,
    Such as have everywhere loved well to make
    Their chosen home above all other trees,
    ’Mid the fal’n palaces of ancient Rome,
    Me did such haunt please better, or I loved,
    With others whom the like disquietude,
    At the like crisis of their lives, now kept
    Restless, with them to question to and fro
    And to debate the evil of the world,
    As tho’ we bore no portion of that ill,
    As tho’ with subtle phrases we could spin
    A woof to screen us from its undelight:
    Such talk sometimes prolonging into night,
    As being loth to separate, and find
    Each in his solitude how vain are words,
    When that they have opposed to them is more.

      I would not live that time again for much,
    Full as it was of long and weary days,
    Full of rebellious askings, for what end,
    And by what power, without our own consent,
    We were placed here, to suffer and to sin,
    To be in misery and know not why.
    But so it was with me, a sojourner,
    Five years ago, beneath these mouldering walls
    As I am now: and, trusted friend, to thee
    I have not doubted to reveal my soul,
    For thou hast known, if I may read aright
    The pages of thy past existence, thou
    Hast known the dreary sickness of the soul,
    That falls upon us in our lonely youth,
    The fear of all bright visions leaving us,
    The sense of emptiness, without the sense
    Of an abiding fulness anywhere,
    When all the generations of mankind,
    With all their purposes, their hopes and fears,
    Seem nothing truer than those wandering shapes
    Cast by a trick of light upon a wall,
    And nothing different from these, except
    In their capacity for suffering;
    What time we have the sense of sin, and none
    Of expiation. Our own life seemed then
    But as an arrow flying in the dark
    Without an aim, a most unwelcome gift,
    Which we might not put by. But now, what God
    Intended as a blessing and a boon
    We have received as such, and we can say
    A solemn yet a joyful thing is life,
    Which, being full of duties, is for this
    Of gladness full, and full of lofty hopes.

      And He has taught us what reply to make,
    Or secretly in spirit, or in words,
    If there be need, when sorrowing men complain
    The fair illusions of their youth depart,
    All things are going from them, and to-day
    Is emptier of delights than yesterday,
    Even as to-morrow will be barer yet;
    We have been taught to feel this need not be,
    This is not life’s inevitable law,--
    But that the gladness we are called to know,
    Is an increasing gladness, that the soil
    Of the human heart, tilled rightly, will become
    Richer and deeper, fitter to bear fruit
    Of an immortal growth, from day to day,
    Fruit of love life and indeficient joy.

      Oh! not for baneful self-complacency,
    Not for the setting up our present selves
    To triumph o’er our past (worst pride of all),
    May we compare this present with that past;
    But to provoke renewed acknowledgments,
    But to incite unto an earnest hope
    For all our brethren. And how should I fear
    To own to thee that this is in my heart--
    This longing, that it leads me home to-day,
    Glad even while I turn my back on Rome,
    Yet half unseen--its arts, its memories,
    Its glorious fellowship of living men;
    Glad in the hope to tread the soil again
    Of England, where our place of duty lies:
    Not as altho’ we thought we could do much,
    Or claimed large sphere of action for ourselves;
    Not in this thought--since rather be it ours,
    Both thine and mine, to cultivate that frame
    Of spirit, when we know and deeply feel
    How little we can do, and yet do that.




         TASSO’S DUNGEON, FERRARA.


    How might the goaded sufferer in this cell,
    With nothing upon which his eyes might fall,
    Except this vacant court, that dreary wall,
    How might he live? I asked. Here doomed to dwell,
    I marvel how at all he could repel
    Thoughts which to madness and despair would call.
    Enter this vault--the bare sight will appal
    Thy spirit, even as mine within me fell,
    Until I learned that wall not always there
    Had stood--’twas something that this iron grate
    Once had looked out upon a garden fair.
    There must have been then here, to calm his brain,
    Green leaves, and flowers, and sunshine--and a weight
    Fell from me, and my heart revived again.




         SONNET.


    It may be that our homeward longings made
    That other lands were judged with partial eyes;
    But fairer in my sight the mottled skies,
    With pleasant interchange of sun and shade,
    And more desired the meadow and deep glade
    Of sylvan England, green with frequent showers,
    Than all the beauty which the vaunted bowers
    Of the parched South have in mine eyes displayed;
    Fairer and more desired--this well might be:
    For let the South have beauty’s utmost dower,
    And yet my heart might well have turned to thee,
    My home, my country, when a delicate flower
    Within thy pleasant borders was for me
    Tended, and growing up thro’ sun and shower.




         AT BRUNECKEN, IN THE TYROL.


    The men who for this earthly life would claim
    Well nigh the whole, and if the work of heaven
    Be relegated to one day in seven,
    Account the other six may without blame,
    Unsanctified by one diviner aim,
    To self to mammon and the world be given,
    These scanty worshippers might nigh be driven,
    Were they but here, to profitable shame.
    This eve, the closing of no festal day,
    This common work-day eve, in the open street
    Seen have I groups of happy people meet,
    Putting for this their toil and tasks away,
    Men, women, boys, at one rude shrine to pray,
    And there their fervent litanies repeat.




         SONNET.


    To leave unseen so many a glorious sight,
    To leave so many lands unvisited,
    To leave so many worthiest books unread,
    Unrealized so many visions bright;--
    Oh! wretched yet inevitable spite
    Of our short span, and we must yield our breath,
    And wrap us in the lazy coil of death,
    So much remaining of unproved delight.
    But hush, my soul, and, vain regrets, be stilled
    Find rest in Him who is the complement
    Of whatsoe’er transcends your mortal doom,
    Of broken hope and frustrated intent;
    In the clear vision and aspèct of whom
    All wishes and all longings are fulfilled.




         LINES WRITTEN IN AN INN.


    A dreary lot is his who roams
    “Homeless among a thousand homes;”
    A dreary thing it is to stray,
    As I have sometimes heard men say,
    And of myself have partly known,
    A passing stranger and alone
    In some great city: harder there,
    With life about us everywhere,
    Than in the desert to restrain
    A sense of solitary pain.
    We wander thro’ the busy street,
    And think how every one we meet
    Has parents sister friend or wife,
    With whom to share the load of life.
    We wander on, for little care
    Have we turn our footsteps there,
    Where we are but a nameless guest,
    One who may claim no interest
    In any heart--a passing face,
    That comes and goes, and leaves no trace;
    Where service waits us, prompt but cold,
    A loveless service, bought and sold.

      Yet hard it is not to sustain
    A time like this, if there remain
    True greetings for us, hand and heart,
    Wherein we claim the chiefest part,
    Although divided now they be
    By many a tract of land and sea.
    If we can fly to thoughts like these,
    Fall back on such sure sympathies,
    This were sufficient to repress
    That transient sense of loneliness.

      Yet better if, where’er we roam,
    Another country, truer home,
    Is in our hearts; if there we find
    The word of power, that from the mind
    All sad and drear thoughts shall repel,
    All solitary broodings quell;
    If in the joy of heav’n we live,
    Nor only on what earth can give,
    Tho’ pure and high--so we may learn
    Unto the soul’s great good to turn
    What things soever best engage
    Our thoughts towàrd our pilgrimage,
    Which teach us this is not our rest,
    That here we are but as a guest.
    As doubtless ’twas no other thought
    That in his holy bosom wrought,
    Who not alone content to win
    In life the shelter of an inn,
    Was fain to finish the last stage
    There of his mortal pilgrimage[7]

      We too, if we are wise, may be
    Pleased for a season to be free
    From the encumbrances which love--
    Affection hallowed from above,
    But earthly yet, has power to fling
    About the spirit’s heav’nward wing;
    Pleased if we feel that God is nigh,
    Both where we live and where we die,
    Whether among true kindred thrown,
    Or seeming outwardly alone,
    That whether this or that befal,
    He watches and has care of all.




         TO E ----.


    Much have we to support us in our strife
    With things which else would crush us, nor alone
    Secret refreshings of the inward life,
    But many a flower of sweetest scent is strown
    Upon our outward and our open way;
    None sweeter than are at some seasons known
    To them who dwell for many a prosperous day
    Under one roof, and have, as they would hope,
    One purpose for their lives, one aim, one scope--
    To labour upward on the path to heaven.
    Full of refreshment these occasions are,
    Like seasonable resting-places given
    To pilgrim feet; for tho’, alas! too rare,
    Yet the sweet memories they supply, will give
    The food on which affection’s heart may live
    In after times; since it were sad indeed
    If all more intimate knowledge did not breed
    More trust in one another and more love,
    More faith that each is seeking to attain
    With humble earnest effort, not in vain,
    The happy rest of God. And so they part
    On their divided ways with cheerful heart,
    Knowing that in all places they will call
    On the same God and Father over all;
    And part not wholly, since they meet whose prayer
    Meets at the throne of grace; one life divine
    Through all the branches of the mystical vine
    Flows ever, even as the same breath of air
    Lifts every leaflet of a mighty grove.
    And from our meeting we shall reap a share
    Of a yet higher good, if we have won
    Hereby the strengthening of one weak desire,
    The fanning of one faint spark to a fire,
    The stirring of one prayer, that we may prove
    Stedfast and faithful till our work be done,
    Until the course appointed us be run.

      We know not whither our frail barks are borne,
    To quiet haven, or on stormy shore;
    Nor need we seek to know it, while above
    The tempest and the waters’ angriest roar
    Are heard the voices of Almighty love--
    So we shall find none dreary nor forlorn.
    Whither we go we know not, but we know
    That if we keep our faces surely set
    Towàrd new Zion, we shall reach at last,
    When every danger, every woe is past,
    The city where the sealèd tribes are met,
    Whither the nations of the savèd flow,
    The city with its heav’n-descended halls,
    The city builded round with diamond walls.

      Then how should we feel sorrow or dim fear
    At any parting now, if there to meet;
    How should our hearts with sadder pulses beat,
    When thou art going where kind hearts will greet
    And welcome thy return, and there as here
    Thou still wilt find thine own appointed sphere,
    To fill the measure up of gentle deeds,
    Even as we have learnèd that in these,
    That in the holy Christian charities,
    And the suppliance of the lowliest needs
    Of the most lowly, our true greatness is.

      Therefore we will not seek to win thy stay,
    Nor ask but this--that thou shouldst bear away
    Kind memories of us, and only claim
    What of thyself thou wilt be prompt to give,
    That in thy heart’s affections he may live,
    To whom thou bearest that most holy name
    Of spiritual mother. O beloved friend,
    It is a cheering thought, if I should be
    Where I can no more watch for him nor tend
    His infant years--there where I cannot see
    What good, what evil wait upon his way,
    That yet thy love thy counsel and thy cares
    He will not lack, a child of faithful prayers.




         TO ----.

         ON THE MORNING OF HER BAPTISM.


    This will we name thy better birth-day, child,
      O born already to a sin-worn world,
    But now unto a kingdom undefiled,
      Where over thee love’s banner is unfurled.

    Lo! on the morning of this Sabbath day
      I lay aside the weight of human fears,
    Which I had for thee, and without dismay
      Look through the avenue of coming years.

    I see thee passing without mortal harm
      Thro’ ranks of foes against thy safety met;
    I see thee passing--thy defence and charm,
      The seal of God upon thy forehead set.

    From this time forth thou often shalt hear say
      Of what immortal City thou wert given
    The rights and full immunities to-day,
      And of the hope laid up for thee in heaven.

    From this time forward thou shalt not believe
      That thou art earthly, or that aught of earth,
    Or aught that hell can threaten, shall receive
      Power on the children of the second birth.

    O risen out of death into the day
      Of an immortal life, we bid thee hail,
    And will not kiss the waterdrops away,
      The dew that rests upon thy forehead pale.

    And if the seed of better life lie long,
      As in a wintry hiddenness and death,
    Then calling back this day, we will be strong
      To wait in hope for heaven’s reviving breath;

    To water, if there should be such sad need,
      The undiscernèd germ with sorrowing tears,
    To wait until from that undying seed
      Out of the earth a heavenly plant appears;

    The growth and produce of a fairer land,
      And thence transplanted to a barren soil,
    It needs the tendance of a careful hand,
      Of love, that is not weary with long toil.

    And thou, dear child, whose very helplessness
      Is as a bond upon us and a claim,
    Mayest thou have this of us, as we no less
      Have daily from our Father known the same.




         TO A LADY SINGING.


    How like a swan, cleaving the azure sky,
    The voice upsoars of thy triumphant song,
    That whirled awhile resistlessly along
    By the great sweep of threatening harmony,
    Seemed, overmatched, to struggle helplessly
    With that impetuous music, yet ere long
    Escaping from the current fierce and strong,
    Pierces the clear crystàlline vault on high.
    And I too am upborne with thee together
    In circles ever narrowing, round and round,
    Over the clouds and sunshine--who erewhile,
    Like a blest bird of charmèd summer-weather
    In the blue shadow of some foamless isle,
    Was floating on the billows of sweet sound.




         THE SAME CONTINUED.


    When the mute voice returns from whence it came,
    The silence of a momentary awe,
    A brief submission to the eternal law
    Of beauty doth to every heart proclaim
    A Spirit has been summoned; yea, the same
    Whose dwelling is the inmost human heart,
    Which will not from that home and haunt depart,
    Which nothing can quite vanquish or make tame.
    It is the noblest gift beneath the moon,
    The power, this awful presence to compel
    Out of the lurking places where it lies
    Deep-hidden and removed from human eyes:
    Oh! reverence thou in fear and cherish well
    This privilege of few, this rarest boon.




         THE SAME CONTINUED.


    Look! for a season (ah, too brief a space),
    While yet the spell is strong upon the rout,
    With something of still fear all move about,
    As though a breath or motion might displace
    The Spirit, which had come of heavenly grace
    Among them, for a moment to redeem
    Their thoughts and passions from the selfish dream
    Of earthly life, and its inglorious race.
    If we might keep this awe upon us still,
    If we might walk for ever in the power
    And in the shadow of the mystery,
    Which has been spread around us at this hour,
    This might suffice to guard us from much ill,
    This might go far to keep us pure and free.




         THE SAME CONTINUED.


    But the spell fails--and of the many here,
    Who have been won to brief forgetfulness
    Of all that would degrade them and oppress,
    Who have been carried out of their dim sphere
    Of being, to realms brighter and more clear,
    How few to-morrow will retain a trace,
    Which the world’s business shall not soon efface,
    Of this high mood, this time of reverent fear.
    In these high raptures there is nothing sure,
    Nothing that we can rest on, to sustain
    The spirit long, or arm it to endure
    Against temptation weariness or pain,
    And if they promise to preserve it pure
    From earthly taint, the promise is in vain.




         THE SAME CONTINUED.


    Yet proof is here of men’s unquenched desire
    That the procession of their life might be
    More equable majestic pure and free;
    That there are times when all would fain aspire,
    And gladly use the helps, to lift them higher,
    Which music, poesy, or Nature brings,
    And think to mount upon these waxen wings,
    Not deeming that their strength shall ever tire.
    But who indeed shall his high flights sustain,
    Who soar aloft and sink not? He alone
    Who has laid hold upon that golden chain
    Of love, fast linked to God’s eternal throne,--
    The golden chain from heav’n to earth let down,
    That we might rise by it, nor fear to sink again.




         SONNET.


    A counsellor well fitted to advise
    In daily life and at whose lips no less
    Men may inquire or nations, when distress
    Of sudden doubtful danger may arise,
    Who, though his head be hidden in the skies,
    Plants his firm foot upon our common earth,
    Dealing with thoughts which everywhere have birth,--
    This is the poet, true of heart and wise:
    No dweller in a baseless world of dream,
    Which is not earth nor heav’n: his words have past
    Into man’s common thought and week-day phrase;
    This is the poet, and his verse will last.
    Such was our Shakspeare once, and such doth seem
    One who redeems our later gloomier days.




         SONNET.


    Me rather may to tears unbidden move
    The meanest print that on a cottage wall
    Some ancient deed heroic doth recal,
    Or loving act of His, whose life was love,
    Than that my heart should be too proud to prove
    Emotions and sweet sympathies, until
    The magic of some mighty master’s skill
    Called hues and shapes of wonder from above:
    Since if we do no idle homage pay
    To what in art most beautiful is found,
    We shall have learned to feel in that same hour
    With man’s most rude and most unskilled essay
    To win the beauty that is floating round
    Into abiding forms of grace and power.




         SONNET,

         CONNECTED WITH THE FOREGOING.


    Yes, and not otherwise, if we in deed
    And with pure hearts are seeking what is fair
    In Nature, then believe we shall not need
    Long anxious quests, exploring earth and air
    Ere we shall find wherewith our hearts to feed:
    The beauty which is scattered everywhere
    Will in our souls such deep contentment breed,
    We shall not pine for aught remote or rare;
    We shall not ask from some transcendant height
    To gaze on such rare scenes, as may surpass
    Earth’s common shows, ere we will own delight:
    We shall not need in quest of these to roam,
    While sunshine lies upon our English grass,
    And dewdrops glitter on green fields at home.




         DESPONDENCY[8].


         I.

    It is a weary hill
    Of moving sand that still
    Shifts, struggle as we will,
        Beneath our tread:
    Of those who went before,
    And tracked the desert o’er,
    The footmarks are no more,
        But gone and fled.


         II.

    We stray to either side,
    We wander far and wide,
    We fall to sleep and slide
        Far down again:
    As thro’ the sand we wade,
    We do not seek to aid
    Our fellows, but upbraid
        Each others’ pain.


         III.

    I gaze on that bright band
    Who on the summit stand,
    To order and command,
        Like stars on high:
    Yet with despairing pace
    My way I could retrace,
    Or on this desert place
        Sink down and die.


         IV.

    As we who toil and weep,
    And with our weeping steep
    The path o’er which we creep,
        They had not striven;
    They must have taken flight
    To that serenest height,
    And won it by the might
        Of wings from heaven.


         V.

    Alack! I have no wing,
    My spirit lacks that spring,
    And Nature will not bring
        Her help to me.
    From her I have no aid,
    But light-enwoven shade,
    And stream and star upbraid
        Our misery.




         ODE TO SLEEP.


         I.

    I cannot veil mine eyelids from the light;
    I cannot turn away
    From this insulting and importunate day,
    That momently grows fiercer and more bright,
    And wakes the hideous hum of monstrous flies
    In my vexed ear, and beats
    On the broad panes, and like a furnace heats
    The chamber of my rest, and bids me rise.


         II.

    I cannot follow thy departing track,
    Nor tell in what far meadows, gentle Sleep,
    Thou art delaying. I would win thee back,
    Were mine some drowsy potion, or dull spell,
    Or charmèd girdle, mighty to compel
    Thy heavy grace; for I have heard it said,
    Thou art no flatterer, that dost only keep
    In kingly haunts, leaving unvisited
    The poor man’s lowlier shed;
    And when the day is joyless, and its task
    Unprofitable, I were fain to ask,
    Why thou wilt give it such an ample space,
    Why thou wilt leave us such a weary scope
    For memory, and for that which men call hope,
    Nor wind in one embrace
    Sad eve and night forlorn
    And undelightful morn.


         III.

    If with the joyous were thine only home,
    I would not so far wrong thee, as to ask
    This boon, or summon thee from happier task.
    But no,--for then thou wouldst too often roam
    And find no rest; for me, I cannot tell
    What tearless lids there are, where thou mightst dwell.
    I know not any, unenthralled of sorrow,
    I know not one, to whom this joyous morrow,
    So full of living motion new and bright,
    Will be a summons to secure delight.
    And thus I shall not harm thee, though I claim
    Awhile thy presence--O mysterious Sleep.
    Some call thee shadow of a mightier Name,
    And whisper how that nightly thou dost keep
    A roll and count for him.--
    Then be thou on my spirit like his presence dim.


         IV.

    Yet if my limbs were heavy with sweet toil,
    I had not needed to have wooed thy might,
    But till thy timely flight
    Had lain securely in thy peaceful coil.
    Or if my heart were lighter, long ago
    Had crushed the dewy morn upon the sod,
    Darkening where I trod,
    As was my pleasure once, but now it is not so.


         V.

    And therefore am I seeking to entwine
    A coronal of poppies for my head,
    Or wreathe it with a wreath engarlanded
    By Lethe’s slumberous waters. Oh! that mine
    Were some dim chamber turning to the north,
    With latticed casement, bedded deep in leaves,
    That opening with sweet murmur might look forth
    On quiet fields from broad o’erhanging eaves,
    And ever when the Spring her garland weaves,
    Were darkened with encroaching ivy-trail
    And jaggèd vine-leaves’ shade;
    And all its pavement starred with blossoms pale
    Of jasmine, when the wind’s least stir was made;
    Where the sun-beam were verdurous-cool, before
    It wound into that quiet nook, to paint
    With interspace of light and colour faint
    That tesselated floor.
    How pleasant were it there in dim recess,
    In some close-curtained haunt of quietness,
    To hear no tones of human pain and care,
    Our own or others, little heeding there,
    If morn or noon or night
    Pursued their weary flight,
    But musing what an easy thing it were
    To mix our opiates in a larger cup,
    And drink, and not perceive
    Sleep deepening lead his truer kinsman up,
    Like undistinguished Night, darkening the skirts of Eve.




         ATLANTIS.


         I.

      I could loose my boat,
      And could bid it float
    Where the idlest wind should pilot,
      So its glad course lay
      From this earth away,
    Towards any untrodden islet.


         II.

      For this earth is old,
      And its heart is cold,
    And the palsy of age has bound it;
      And my spirit frets
      For the viewless nets
    Which are hourly clinging round it.


         III.

      And with joyful glee
      We have heard of thee,
    Thou Isle in mid ocean sleeping;
      And thy records old,
      Which the Sage has told,
    How the Memphian tombs are keeping.


         IV.

      But we know not where,
      ’Neath the desert air,
    To look for the pleasant places
      Of the youth of Time,
      Whose austerer prime
    The haunts of his childhood effaces.


         V.

      Like the golden flowers
      Of the western bowers,
    Have waned their immortal shadows;
      And no harp may tell
      Where the asphodel
    Clad in light those Elysian meadows.


         VI.

      And thou, fairest Isle
      In the daylight’s smile,
    Hast thou sunk in the boiling ocean,
      While beyond thy strand
      Rose a mightier land
    From the wave in alternate motion?


         VII.

      Are the isles that stud
      The Atlantic flood,
    But the peaks of thy tallest mountains,
      While repose below
      The great water’s flow
    Thy towns and thy towers and fountains?


         VIII.

      Have the Ocean powers
      Made their quiet bowers,
    In thy fanes and thy dim recesses?
      Or in haunts of thine
      Do the sea-maids twine
    Coral wreaths for their dewy tresses?


         IX.

      Or does foot not fall
      In deserted hall,
    Choked with wrecks that ne’er won their haven,
      By the ebb trailed o’er
      Thy untrampled floor,
    Which their sunken wealth has paven?


         X.

      Oh, appear! appear!
      Not as when thy spear
    Ruled as far as the broad Egean,
      But in Love’s own might,
      And in Freedom’s right,
    Till the nations uplift their Pæan,


         XI.

      Who now watch and weep,
      And their vigil keep,
    Till they faint for expectation;
      Till their dim eyes shape
      Temple tower and cape
    From the cloud and the exhalation.




         SAIS.


    An awful statue, by a veil half-hid,
    At Sais stands. One came, to whom was known
    All lore committed to Etruscan stone,
    And all sweet voices, that dull time has chid
    To silence now, by antique Pyramid,
    Skirting the desert, heard; and what the deep
    May in its dimly-lighted chambers keep,
    Where Genii groan beneath the seal-bound lid.
    He dared to raise that yet unlifted veil
    With hands not pure, but never might unfold
    What there he saw--madness, the shadow, fell
    On his few days, ere yet he went to dwell
    With night’s eternal people, and his tale
    Has thus remained, and will remain, untold.




         SONNET.


    I stood beside a pool, from whence ascended,
    Mounting the platforms of the cloudy wind,
    A stately hern--its soaring I attended,
    Till it grew dim, and I with watching blind--
    When, lo! a shaft of arrowy light descended
    Upon its darkness and its dim attire:
    It straightway kindled then, and was afire,
    And with the unconsuming radiance blended.
    A bird, a cloud, flecking the sunny air,
    It had its golden dwelling mid the lightning
    Of those empyreal domes, and it might there
    Have dwelt for ever, glorified and brightning,
    But that its wings were weak--so it became
    A dusky speck again, that _was_ a wingèd flame.




         RECOLLECTIONS OF BURGOS.


    Most like some agèd king it seemed to me,
    Who had survived his old regality,
    Poor and deposed, but keeping still his state,
    In all he had before of truly great;
    With no vain wishes and no vain regret,
    But his enforcèd leisure soothing yet
    With meditation calm and books and prayer;
    For all was sober and majestic there--
    The old Castilian, with close finger tips
    Pressing his folded mantle to his lips;
    The dim cathedral’s cross-surmounted pile,
    With carved recess, and cool and shadowy aisle,
    And had not from dark hoods peered darker eyes,
    All fitted well for meditation wise--
    The walks of poplar by the river’s side,
    That wound by many a straggling channel wide;
    And seats of stone, where one might sit and weave
    Visions, till well-nigh tempted to believe
    That life had few things better to be done,
    And many worse, than resting in the sun
    To lose the hours, and wilfully to dim
    Our half-shut eyes, and veil them till might swim
    The pageant by us, smoothly as the stream
    And unremembered pageant of a dream.

      A castle crowned a neighbouring hillock’s crest,
    But now the moat was level with the rest;
    And all was fallen of this place of power,
    All heaped with formless stone, save one round tower,
    And here and there a gateway low and old,
    Figured with antique shape of warrior bold.
    And then behind this eminence the sun
    Would drop serenely, long ere day was done;
    And one who climbed that height might see again
    A second setting o’er the fertile plain
    Beyond the town, and glittering in his beam,
    Wind far away that poplar-skirted stream.




         TO A FRIEND.


    Thou that hast travelled far away,
      In lands beyond the sea,
    Wilt understand me, when I say
      What there has come to me.

    In chambers dim thou wilt have wrought,
      With no one by, to cheer,
    And trod the downward paths of thought,
      In solitude and fear;

    Nor till the weary day was o’er,
      Into the air have fled
    From thought which could delight no more,
      From books whose power was dead;

    What time perchance the drooping day
      With burning vapour fills
    The deep recesses far away
      Of all the golden hills:

    Or later, when the twilight blends
      All hues, or when the moon
    Into the ocean depths descends,
      A wavering column, down.

    Then hast not thou in spirit leapt,
      Emerging from thy gloom,
    Like one who unawares o’erstept
      The barriers of a tomb.

    And in thine exultation cried--
      Of gladness having fill,
    And in it being glorified--
      “The world is beauteous still!”




         TO THE CONSTITUTIONAL EXILES OF 1823.

[WRITTEN IN 1829.]


    Wise are ye in a wisdom vainly sought
    Thro’ all the records of the historic page;
    It is not to be learned by lengthened age,
    Scarce by deep musings of unaided thought:
    By suffering and endurance ye have bought
    A knowledge of the thousand links that bind
    The highest with the lowest of our kind,
    And how the indissoluble chain is wrought.
    Ye fell by your own mercy once--beware,
    When your lots leap again from fortune’s urn,
    An heavier error--to be pardoned less.
    Yours be it to the nations to declare
    That years of pain and disappointment turn
    Weak hearts to gall, but wise to gentleness.




         TO THE SAME.


    Like nightly watchers from a palace tower,
    In hope and faith and patience strong to wait
    The beacons on the hills, which should relate
    How some fenced city of deceit and power
    Had fallen--ye have stood for many an hour,
    Till your first hope’s high movements must be dead,
    And if with new ye have not cheered and fed
    Your bosoms, dim despair may be your dower.
    Yet not for all--tho’ yet no fire may crest
    The mountains, or light up their beacons sere--
    Your eminent commission so far wrong,
    Or so much flatter the oppressors’ rest,
    As to give o’er your watching, for so long
    As ye shall hope, ’tis reason they must fear.




         SONNET.


    The moments that we rescue and redeem
    From the bare desert and the waste of years,
    To fertilize, it may be with our tears,
    Yet so that for time after they shall teem
    With better than rank weeds, and wear a gleam
    Of visionary light, and on the wind
    Fling odours from the fields long left behind,
    These and their fruit to us can never seem
    Indifferent things, and therefore do I look
    Not without gentle sadness upon thee,
    And liken thy outgoing, O my book,
    To the impatience of a little brook,
    Which might with flowers have lingered pleasantly,
    Yet toils to perish in the mighty sea.




         ON AN EARLY DEATH.


         I.

    Ah me! of them from whom the good have hope,
    Of them whom virtue for her liegemen claims,
    How many the world tames,
    That with its evil they quite cease to cope,
    And their first fealty sworn to beauty and truth
    Break early; and amid their sinful youth
    Make shipwreck of all high and glorious aims.
    How few the fierce and fiery trial stand,
    To be as weapons tempered and approved
    For an almighty hand.

    How few of all the streamlets that were moved,
    Do ever unto clearness run again,
    And therefore is it marvellous to us,
    When of these weapons one is broken thus,
    When of these fountains one would seem in vain
    Renewed in clearness, and is staunched before
    It has had leave to spread fresh streams the desert o’er.


         II.

    Ah me! that by so frail and feeble thread
    Our life is holden--that not life alone,
    But all that life has won
    May in an hour be gathered to the dead;
    The slow additions that build up the mind,
    The skill that by temptation we have bought
    And suffering, and whatever has been taught
    By lengthened years and converse with our kind,
    That all may cease together--and the tree
    Reared to its height by many a slow degree,
    And by the dews the sunshine and the showers
    Of many springs, an instant may lay low,
    With all its living towers,
    And all the fruit mature of growth and slow,
    Which on the trees of wisdom leisurely must grow.


         III.

    Alas! it is another thing to wail,
    That when the foremost runners sink and fail,
    They cannot pass their torch or forward place
    To them that are behind them in their race,
    But their extinguished torches must be laid
    Together with them in the dust of death:
    That when the wise and the true-hearted fade,
    So little of themselves they can bequeath
    To us, who yet are in the race of life,
    For labour and for toil, for weariness and strife.


         IV.

    But from behind the veil,
    Where they are entered who have gone before,
    A solemn voice arrests my feeble wail--
    “And has thy life such worthier aims, O man,
    That thou shouldst grudge to give its little span
    To truth and knowledge, and faith’s holy lore,
    Because the places for the exercise
    Of these may be withdrawn from mortal eyes.
    Win truth, win goodness--for which man was made,
    And fear not thou of these to be bereft,
    Fear not that these shall in the dust be laid,
    Or in corruption left,
    Or be the grave-worm’s food.
    Nothing is left or lost--nothing of good,
    Or lovely; but whatever its first springs
    Has drawn from God, returns to him again;
    That only which ’twere misery to retain
    Is taken from you, which to keep were loss;
    Only the scum the refuse and the dross
    Are borne away unto the grave of things,
    Meanwhile whatever gifts from heav’n descend
    Thither again have flowed,
    To the receptacle of all things good,
    From whom they come and unto whom they tend,
    Who is the First and Last, the Author and the End.


         V.

    And fear to sorrow with increase of grief,
    When they who go before
    Go furnished--or because their span was brief,
    When in the acquist of what is life’s true gage,
    Truth, knowledge, and that other worthiest lore,
    They had fulfilled already a long age.
    For doubt not but that in the worlds above
    There must be other offices of love,
    That other tasks and ministries there are,
    Since it is promised that His servants, there
    Shall serve him still. Therefore be strong, be strong,
    Ye that remain, nor fruitlessly revolve,
    Darkling, the riddles which ye cannot solve,
    But do the works that unto you belong,
    Believing that for every mystery,
    For all the death the darkness and the curse
    Of this dim universe,
    Needs a solution full of love must be:
    And that the way whereby ye may attain
    Nearest to this, is not thro’ broodings vain
    And half-rebellious--questionings of God,
    But by a patient seeking to fulfil
    The purpose of his everlasting will,
    Treading the way which lowly men have trod.
    Since it is ever they who are too proud
    For this, that are the foremost and most loud
    To judge his hidden judgments, these are still
    The most perplexed and mazed at his mysterious will.”




         SONNET.


    When I have sometimes read of precious things,
    The precious things of earth, which yet are vile,
    Together heaped into the graves of kings,
    Or wasted with them on their funeral pile,
    Steeds arms and costly vestments and the dross
    Which men call gold, feeding one ravenous pyre,
    I have been little moved at all the loss
    Of all the treasure which fond men admire.
    But when I hear of some too early doom,
    Snatching wit wisdom valour grace away,
    Or our own loss has taught me what the tomb
    May cover from us, then I feel and say
    That earth has things whereon the grave may feed,
    And feeding may make poor the world indeed.




         SONNET.


    What is the greatness of a fallen king?
    This--that his fall avails not to abate
    His spirit to a level with his fate,
    Or inward fall along with it to bring;
    That he disdains to stoop his former wing,
    But keeps in exile and in want the law
    Of kingship yet, and counts it scorn to draw
    Comfort indign from any meaner thing.
    Soul, that art fallen from thine ancient place,
    Mayest thou in this mean world find nothing great,
    Nor aught that shall the memories efface
    Of that true greatness which was once thine own,
    As knowing thou must keep thy kingly state,
    If thou wouldst reascend thy kingly throne.




         NEW YEAR’S EVE.


    The strong in spiritual action need not look
    Upon the new-found year as on a scroll,
    The which their hands lack cunning to unroll,
    But in it read, as in an open book,
    All they are seeking--high resolve unshook
    By circumstance’s unforeseen control,
    Successful striving, and whate’er the soul
    Has recognised for duty, not forsook.
    But they whom many failures have made tame,
    Question the future with that reverent fear,
    Which best their need of heav’nly aid may shew.
    Will it have purer thought, and loftier aim
    Pursued more loftily? That a man might know
    What thou wilt bring him, thou advancing year!




         TO MY CHILD.


    Thy gladness makes me thankful every way,
    To look upon thy gladness makes me glad;
    While yet in part it well might render sad
    Us thinking that we too might sport and play,
    And keep like thee continual holiday,
    If we retained the things which once we had,
    If we like happy Neophytes were clad
    Still in baptismal stoles of white array.
    And yet the gladness of the innocent child
    Has not more matter for our thankful glee
    Than the dim sorrows of the man defiled;
    Since both in sealing one blest truth agree--
    Joy is of God, but heaviness and care
    Of our own hearts and what has harboured there.




         SONNET.


    An open wound that has been healed anew;
    A stream dried up, that once again is fed
    With waters making green its grassy bed;
    A tree that withered was, but to the dew
    Puts forth young leaves and blossoms fresh of hue,
    Even from the branches which had seemed most dead;
    A sea which having been disquieted,
    Now stretches like a mirror calm and blue,--
    Our hearts to each of these were likened well.
    But Thou wert the physician and the balm;
    Thou, Lord, the fountain, whence anew was filled
    Their parchèd channel; Thou the dew that fell
    On their dead branches; ’twas thy voice that stilled
    The storm within--Thou didst command the calm.




         SONNET.

         IN A PASS OF BAVARIA BETWEEN THE WALCHEN AND THE WALDENSEE.

“His voice was as the sound of many waters.”


    A sound of many waters--now I know
    To what was likened the large utterance sent
    By Him who ’mid the golden lampads went:
    Innumerable streams, above, below,
    Some seen, some heard alone, with headlong flow
    Come rushing; some with smooth and sheer descent,
    Some dashed to foam and whiteness, but all blent
    Into one mighty music. As I go,
    The tumult of a boundless gladness fills
    My bosom, and my spirit leaps and sings:
    Sounds and sights are there of the ancient hills,
    The eagle’s cry, or when the mountain flings
    Mists from its brow, but none of all these things
    Like the one voice of multitudinous rills.




         SONNET.


    What is thy worship but a vain pretence,
    Spirit of Beauty, and a servile trade,
    A poor and an unworthy traffic made
    With the most sacred gifts of soul and sense;
    If they who tend thine altars, gathering thence
    No strength, no purity, may still remain
    Selfish and dark, and from Life’s sordid stain
    Find in their ministrations no defence?
    Thus many times I ask, when aught of mean
    Or sensual has been brought unto mine ear,
    Of them whose calling high is to insphere
    Eternal Beauty in forms of human art--
    Vexed that my soul should ever moved have been
    By that which has such feigning at the heart.




         SONNET.


    Thou cam’st not to thy place by accident,
    It is the very place God meant for thee;
    And shouldst thou there small scope for action see,
    Do not for this give room to discontent;
    Nor let the time thou owest to God be spent
    In idly dreaming how thou mightest be,
    In what concerns thy spiritual life, more free
    From outward hindrance or impediment.
    For presently this hindrance thou shalt find
    That without which all goodness were a task
    So slight, that Virtue never could grow strong:
    And wouldst thou do one duty to His mind,
    The Imposer’s--over-burdened thou shalt ask,
    And own thy need of grace to help, ere long.




         TO MY GOD-CHILD,

         ON THE DAY OF HIS BAPTISM.


    No harsh transitions Nature knows,
      No dreary spaces intervene;
    Her work in silence forward goes,
      And rather felt than seen.

    For where the watcher, that with eye
      Turned eastward, yet could ever say
    When the faint glooming in the sky
      First lightened into day?

    Or maiden, by an opening flower
      That many a summer morn has stood,
    Could fix upon the very hour
      It ceased to be a bud?

    The rainbow colours mix and blend
      Each with the other, until none
    Can tell where fainter hues had end,
      And deeper tints begun.

    But only doth this much appear--
      That the pale hues are deeper grown;
    The day has broken bright and clear;
      The bud is fully blown.

    Dear child, and happy shalt thou be,
      If from this hour, with just increase
    All good things shall grow up in thee,
      By such unmarked degrees.

    If there shall be no dreary space
      Between thy present self and past,
    No dreary miserable place
      With spectral shapes aghast;

    But the full graces of thy prime
      Shall, in their weak beginnings, be
    Lost in an unremembered time
      Of holy infancy.

    This blessing is the first and best;
      Yet has not prayer been made in vain
    For them, tho’ not so amply blest,
      The lost and found again.

    And shouldest thou, alas! forbear
      To choose the better, nobler lot,
    Yet may we not esteem our prayer
      Unheard or heeded not;

    If after many a wandering,
      And many a devious pathway trod;
    If having known that bitter thing,
      To leave the Lord thy God,

    It yet shall be, that thou at last,
      Altho’ thy noon be lost, return
    To bind life’s eve in union fast
      To this, its blessed morn.




         THE MONK AND BIRD.


         I.

    As he who finds one flower sharp thorns among,
      Plucks it, and highly prizes, though before
    Careless regard on thousands he has flung,
      As fair as this or more;


         II.

    Not otherwise perhaps this argument
      Won from me, where I found it, such regard,
    That I esteemed no labour thereon spent
      As wearisome or hard.


         III.

    In huge and antique volume did it lie,
      That by two solemn clasps was duly bound,
    As neither to be opened or laid by
      But with due thought profound.


         IV.

    There fixèd thought to questions did I lend,
      Which hover on the bounds of mortal ken,
    And have perplexed, and will unto the end
      Perplex the brains of men;


         V.

    Of what is time, and what eternity,
      Of all that seems and is not--forms of things--
    Till my tired spirit followed painfully
      On flagging weary wings.


         VI.

    So that I welcomed this one resting-place,
      Pleased as a bird, that when its forces fail,
    Lights panting in the ocean’s middle space
      Upon a sunny sail.


         VII.

    And now the grace of fiction, which has power
      To render things impossible believed,
    And win them with the credence of an hour
      To be for truths received--


         VIII.

    That grace must help me, as it only can,
      Winning such transient credence, while I tell
    What to a cloistered solitary man
      In ancient times befel.


         IX.

    Him little might our earthly grandeur feed,
      Who to the uttermost was vowed to be
    A follower of his Master’s barest need,
      In holy poverty.


         X.

    Nor might he know the gentle mutual strife
      Of home affections, which can more or less
    Temper with sweet the bitter of our life,
      And lighten its distress.


         XI.

    Yet we should err to deem that he was left
      To bear alone our being’s lonely weight,
    Or that his soul was vacant and bereft
      Of pomp and inward state:


         XII.

    Morn, when before the sun his orb unshrouds,
      Swift as a beacon torch the light has sped,
    Kindling the dusky summits of the clouds
      Each to a fiery red--


         XIII.

    The slanted columns of the noonday light,
      Let down into the bosom of the hills,
    Or sunset, that with golden vapour bright
      The purple mountains fills--


         XIV.

    These made him say,--if God has so arrayed
      A fading world that quickly passes by,
    Such rich provision of delight was made
      For every human eye,


         XV.

    What shall the eyes that wait for him survey,
      Where his own presence gloriously appears
    In worlds that were not founded for a day,
      But for eternal years?


         XVI.

    And if at seasons this world’s undelight
      Oppressed him, or the hollow at its heart,
    One glance at those enduring mansions bright
      Made gloomier thoughts depart;


         XVII.

    Till many times the sweetness of the thought
      Of an eternal country--where it lies
    Removed from care and mortal anguish, brought
      Sweet tears into his eyes.


         XVIII.

    Thus, not unsolaced, he longwhile abode,
      Filling all dreary melancholy time,
    And empty spaces of the heart with God,
      And with this hope sublime:


         XIX.

    Even thus he lived, with little joy or pain,
      Drawn thro’ the channels by which men receive--
    Most men receive the things which for the main
      Make them rejoice or grieve.


         XX.

    But for delight--on spiritual gladness fed,
      And obvious to temptations of like kind;
    One such, from out his very gladness bred,
      It was his lot to find.


         XXI.

    When first it came, he lightly put it by,
      But it returned again to him ere long,
    And ever having got some new ally,
      And every time more strong--


         XXII.

    A little worm that gnawed the life away
      Of a tall plant, the canker of its root,
    Or like as when, from some small speck, decay
      Spreads o’er a beauteous fruit.


         XXIII.

    For still the doubt came back--can God provide
      For the large heart of man what shall not pall,
    Nor thro’ eternal ages’ endless tide
      On tired spirits fall.


         XXIV.

    Here but one look tow’rd heavèn will repress
      The crushing weight of undelightful care;
    But what were there beyond, if weariness
      Should ever enter there?


         XXV.

    Yet do not sweetest things here soonest cloy?
      Satiety the life of joy would kill,
    If sweet with bitter, pleasure with annoy
      Were not attempered still.


         XXVI.

    This mood endured, till every act of love,
      Vigils of praise and prayer, and midnight choir,
    All shadows of the service done above,
      And which, while his desire,


         XXVII.

    And while his hope was heav’nward, he had loved,
      As helps to disengage him from the chain
    That fastens unto earth--all these now proved
      Most burdensome and vain.


         XXVIII.

    What must have been the issue of that mood
      It were a thing to fear--but that one day,
    Upon the limits of an ancient wood,
      His thoughts him led astray.


         XXIX.

    Darkling he went, nor once applied his ear,
      On a loud sea of agitations thrown,
    Nature’s low tones and harmonies to hear,
      Heard by the calm alone.


         XXX.

    The merry chirrup of the grasshopper,
      Sporting among the roots of withered grass,
    The dry leaf rustling to the wind’s light stir
      Did each unnoted pass:


         XXXI.

    He, walking in a trance of selfish care,
      Not once observed the beauty shed around,
    The blue above, the music in the air,
      The flowers upon the ground;


         XXXII.

    Till from the centre of that forest dim
      Came to him such sweet singing of a bird,
    As sweet in very truth, then seemed to him
      The sweetest ever heard.


         XXXIII.

    That lodestar drew him onward inward still,
      Deeper than where the village children stray,
    Deeper than where the woodman’s glittering bill
      Lops the large boughs away--


         XXXIV.

    Into a central space of glimmering shade,
      Where hardly might the struggling sunbeams pass,
    Which a faint lattice-work of light had made
      Upon the long lank grass.


         XXXV.

    He did not sit, but stood and listened there,
      And to him listening the time seemed not long,
    While that sweet bird above him filled the air
      With its melodious song.


         XXXVI.

    He heard not, saw not, felt not aught beside,
      Through the wide worlds of pleasure and of pain,
    Save the full flowing and the ample tide
      Of that celestial strain.


         XXXVII.

    As tho’ a bird of Paradise should light
      A moment on a twig of this bleak earth,
    And singing songs of Paradise invite
      All hearts to holy mirth,


         XXXVIII.

    And then take wing to Paradise again,
      Leaving all listening spirits raised above
    The toil of earth the trouble and the pain,
      And melted all in love:


         XXXIX.

    Such spiritual might, such power was in the sound,
      But when it ceased sweet music to unlock,
    The spell that held him sense and spirit-bound
      Dissolved with a slight shock.


         XL.

    All things around were as they were before--
      The trees and the blue sky, and sunshine bright,
    Painting the pale and leafstrewn forest-floor
      With patches of faint light.


         XLI.

    But as when music doth no longer thrill,
      Light shudderings yet along the chords will run,
    Or the heart vibrates tremulously still,
      After its prayer be done,


         XLII.

    So his heart fluttered all the way he went,
      Listening each moment for the vesper bell;
    For a long hour he deemed he must have spent
      In that untrodden dell.


         XLIII.

    And once it seemed that something new or strange
      Had passed upon the flowers the trees the ground,
    Some slight but unintelligible change
      On every thing around:


         XLIV.

    Such change, where all things undisturbed remain,
      As only to the eye of him appears,
    Who absent long, at length returns again--
      The silent work of years.


         XLV.

    And ever grew upon him more and more
      Fresh marvel--for, unrecognised of all,
    He stood a stranger at the convent door--
      New faces filled the hall.


         XLVI.

    Yet was it long ere he received the whole
      Of that strange wonder--how, while he had stood
    Lost in deep gladness of his inmost soul,
      Far hidden in that wood,


         XLVII.

    A generation had gone down unseen
      Under the thin partition which is spread--
    The thin partition of thin earth--between
      The living and the dead.


         XLVIII.

    Nor did he many days to earth belong,
      For like a pent-up stream, released again,
    The years arrested by the strength of song,
      Came down on him amain;


         XLIX.

    Sudden as a dissolving thaw in spring;
      Gentle as when upon the first warm day,
    Which sunny April in its train may bring,
      The snow melts all away.


         L.

    They placed him in his former cell, and there
      Watched him departing; what few words he said
    Were of calm peace and gladness, with one care
      Mingled--one only dread--


         LI.

    Lest an eternity should not suffice
      To take the measure and the breadth and height
    Of what there is reserved in Paradise--
      Its ever-new delight.


                                LONDON:
              BRADBURY AND EVANS, PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS.


         FOOTNOTES:

 [1] See Gen. xxvi. 18.

 [2]

    Qual es la niña
    Que coge las flores
    Si no tiene amores?
         SPANISH BALLAD.


 [3] Eusebius thus speaks of the Antichristian power:--Τον θεο μαχου
  ... τας πρας τον Υψιστου τοις αγγελοις παραδοθεισας των εθνων
 ‘οροθεσιας και συγχειν απειλουντος.

 [4] Some of the old Litanies specially included these last:--’Pro
 navigantibus, iter agentibus, in carceribus, in vinculis, _in
 metallis_, in exiliis constitutis, precamur Te.

 [5] See Augustine’s Confessions, B. 9, C. 10.

 [6] See Garcilasso’s Conquest of Peru.

 [7] “He [Archbishop Leighton] used often to say, that if he were
 to choose a place to die in, it should be an inn; it looks like a
 pilgrim’s going home, to whom this world was all as an inn, and
 who was weary of the noise and confusion in it. He added that the
 officious care and tenderness of friends was an entanglement to a
 dying man, and that the unconcerned attendance of those that could be
 procured in such a place would give less disturbance, and he obtained
 what he desired.”--_Burnet’s History of his own Time._

 [8] The poems which follow, from this page to p. 153 inclusive, as
 also some scattered in other parts of the volume, were written many
 years ago. I mention this here, and indeed only mention it at all,
 because some of those that follow are the expression of states of
 mind, in which I would not now ask others to sympathise, and from
 which I am thankful myself to have been delivered.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Justin Martyr, and Other
Poems, by Richard Chenevix Trench

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF JUSTIN MARTYR ***

***** This file should be named 55507-0.txt or 55507-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/5/0/55507/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
